# 4.3 Ultra endings

The Ultra endings were available as of gamma ten. In this gamma, the restriction on Chaos 
Gate entry for chaotics only was removed. However, the PC needs to have a mythical and long 
searched-for weapon - the Trident of the Red Rooster (TotRR). The steps necessary to obtain 
it are listed below.

One problem with the ultra endings is the necessity of changing alignment more than once at 
a relatively advanced stage of the game. All PCs attempting an Ultra ending must procure 
the Crown of Chaos and Medal of Chaos. In order to receive the quests for the Medal of 
Chaos from Gaab'Baay the PC must be at some flavor of chaotic alignment. There are six 
quests total, the first of which is to "satisfy the mutated one" which refers to completing 
the demented ratling's demand for six artifacts. The demented ratling will also only talk 
to chaotics. The demented ratling reveals the secret of the Stone Circle, where Keriax, the 
multi-headed chaos dragon who holds the Crown of Chaos resides. In practice the PC is 
usually fully C by the time the Medal of Chaos is obtained, since the quests for the Medal 
of Chaos involve killing a farmer, usually a non-hostile monster. After receiving the Medal 
of Chaos, the PC is free to change alignment, since the Stone Circle can be entered 
regardless of alignment. Remember the PC must change back to at least some flavor of 
neutral alignment in order to retrieve the TotRR. Khelavaster will not summon the TotRR for 
chaotics. The problem becomes more vexing since the longer high level PCs remain chaotic, 
the more difficult it is to change alignment back towards neutrality or law, becoming very 
difficult at experience level 50. There have been two reports of a C PC changing back to 
neutrality at experience level 50. The first sacrificed small amounts of gold between 100 
- 200 times using two separate neutral altars (the first altar's alignment changed during 
the sacrificing). The second used the same technique with a single lawful altar. The PC 
must balance the necessity of changing alignment as *early* as possible in order to get 
back to neutrality with the necessity to change as *late* as possible in order to satisfy 
Gaab'Baay's quests, some of which involve delivering rare or precious items (a scroll of 
danger and a potion of cure corruption respectively). If the PC has wishes to spare, of 
course, this is not a problem. In practice all of this should be done by about experience 
level 40 - 45 at most, ideally sooner although scrolls of danger can be near-impossible to 
find.

Malte Helmert elaborates further on this phenomenon; the PC in question is experience 
level 50:

> I'm currently playing a dwarven bard in g16pre2 going for an ULE. He has the Trident,
> Orbs and two Trinity parts - the only thing that is still lacking is the L+ alignment. 
> Saccing small amounts of money took me from C to LN. Unfortunately, you can't get 
> further than that with altars. Even saccing millions of gp doesn't work, I checked 
> with another character using WADOMF. It seems like altars only change your alignment 
> (at least at high level) if you are of a different alignment than the altar (this
> does not seem in keeping with my previous experience, so maybe it is not valid for 
> lower-level characters and in any case needs to be investigated more thoroughly).
> 
> So the question is, how do you get to L+ again when you're level 50? 
>
> I found three ways:
>
> * giving food to beggars. One blessed or uncursed stomafillia gives 2 "stones" on the 
> alignment scale, giving more yields more stones (100 gives 200, but it looks like there 
> is an upper bound or something, as 1000 didn't give 2000). I didn't check too much with 
> other food, but it also seems to have an effect (made some experiments with large 
> rations), but less so, probably depending on their satiation value.
>
> * giving money to beggars. Giving less than 1000 doesn't have an effect, giving 1000 or 
> more (no matter how many) gives 1 stone.
>
> * healing your pet. This gives 6 stones (tested with Cure Light Wounds and Heal), but it 
> only works when your pet is actually wounded. So you'd want to find a way of getting your 
> pet constantly hurt but not killed. This isn't exactly easy.
> 
> As LN starts at 1000 stones on the white side and L+ ranges from 5000 to 6000 stones, the 
> "easiest" way of getting there seems to be giving 4-5 millions of gold to beggars in 
> steps of 1000 - if you have the money and can perform one give action in two seconds, 
> it'll still take more than two hours. It follows that this is a major PITA, so you'd 
> better do the chaos quests early if going for an ULE. This is no problem for the UNE, as 
> altars can get you to N= fairly easily.

IMPORTANT UPDATE: all of the above has seemingly been made moot by the March 25th, 2002 
discovery by Queff Himalaya that a level 50 chaotic PC (although a C- PC has not been 
tested) can move to neutral alignment in one turn by giving the Dwarftown Priest 
1,000,000 gold pieces.  This is obviously less tedious than the methods above and much 
less dangerous than sacrificing at altars.  It also may be removed by Thomas in future 
versions, so be careful.

ANOTHER IMPORTANT UPDATE: it has been discovered (April 11th, 2002) that giving gold to the 
Dwarftown Priest, even with a high level C- PC, can change the PC's alignment. High level 
(48) PC's that were C- were able to achieve LN status using this method, when the Dwarftown 
altar was generated as a lawful altar. Note that the status is only LN. Further measures 
are necessary if the PC wants to achieve L+ status.

All of the above has another implication - the PC cannot be crowned until the Medal of 
Chaos (or the TotRR itself, if an Ultimate Chaos God ending is planned) is obtained. Fallen 
champions will never receive the TotRR nor survive passage through the Chaos gate, so the 
nice benefits of crowning must be deferred until the Medal of Chaos or TotRR are obtained.


## 4.3.1 The Trident of the Red Rooster

The Trident of the Red Rooster is the ultimate weapon available in ADOM. Its 
characteristics can be found in Appendix L, but more importantly, it allows passage through 
the Chaos Gate regardless of alignment. Retrieving it is a lengthy process outlined below.

### 4.3.1.1 The Filk quest

The Filk quest is available from the Assassin Prince, on behalf of the Mad Minstrel, once 
three requirements are met. They are: the PC is at least experience level 45, the PC has 
successfully taken Sharad-Waador's quest and slain Srraxxarrakex and the PC has in his 
possession the artifact dagger Needle which is one of the rewards Sharad-Waador provides 
for killing Srraxxarrakex. After receiving the quest, the PC may elect to kill the Assassin 
Prince since he carries Needle's companion dagger Sting. Dual-wielded, they are enormously 
powerful. The object of the quest is to kill Filk, a named quickling bard.

The Assassin Prince gives some cryptic hints provided by the Mad Minstrel about Filk's 
location. They mean that Filk can be found on the level of the ID corresponding to the 
number of first-killed monsters killed. Note that this number can change as the quest 
proceeds. As a quickling, he is obviously fast, but Filk is the fastest of them all with a 
speed of 1500. When attacking Filk, note two things: he has the highest DV of any monster 
in the game at 500 but a PV of zero. Needless to say he is difficult to hit. However, once 
he is hit he is easily killed. He also shares the properties of karmics, although he is not 
named as such. Use missiles, wands, spells, mindcraft or companions to kill him.

### 4.3.1.2 The Mad Minstrel

After the Filk quest is completed, the PC should visit the Mad Minstrel. He will provide 
access to and information about the location of the Scintillating Cave (found in the 
western part of the wilderness south of the RotHK caves very close to the Ruined City).

### 4.3.1.3 The Scintillating Cave

The Scintillating Cave consists of eight cavernous levels. As one of the last places the PC 
will visit, it is dangerous and has a high generation rate featuring very dangerous 
monsters. Ancient Karmic Dragons, Greater Molochs and Emperor Lichs are common. It is best 
to simply get to the down staircases as quickly as possible unless the PC is an absolute 
walking tank by this time (which some aspiring to Ultra endings are). The objective is to 
find the down staircase to the lair of the Emperor Moloch.

#### 4.3.1.3.1 The Emperor Moloch

By this time the PC has probably faced Greater Molochs and can imagine what the Emperor 
Moloch will be like. Extraordinary PV, not much DV, slow and hits like a ton of bricks. In 
addition, the level he resides on is massively corrupting. He must be killed quickly or 
lured off the level. He is vulnerable to phase daggers, ball spells, high effectivity bolt 
spells, demon slaying missiles including the rune-covered trident (although it is not 
guaranteed to return) and greater telekinetic blast. The twin daggers are not effective. 
When killed, he drops two guaranteed items: the crumpled scroll and a moloch armor weighing 
15000 stones(!). The crumpled scroll is the key to the TotRR.

### 4.3.1.4 Khelavaster in Terinyo

At this stage in the game Khelavaster can be found in Terinyo. He is invisible. When given 
the crumpled scroll, he will summon the TotRR. Remember the PC must be of neutral or lawful 
alignment.

## 4.3.2 The Avatar of Order ending

To finish this ending the following requirements must be met: the PC enters the Chaos Gate 
as a crowned L+ Champion of Law wearing the Crown and Medal of Chaos and wielding the TotRR. 
The PC must not be intrinsically doomed or cursed other than due to wearing the Chaos 
artifacts. There is no corruption requirement. Kill Andor Drakon while wielding the TotRR.

## 4.3.3 The Avatar of Balance ending

To finish this ending the following requirements must be met: the PC enters the Chaos Gate 
as a crowned N= Champion of Balance wearing the Crown and Medal of Chaos and wielding the 
TotRR. The PC must not be intrinsically doomed or cursed other than due to wearing the 
Chaos artifacts. The PC must be extremely corrupted (the game will inform you when the PC 
is extremely corrupted). Kill Andor Drakon while wielding the TotRR.

## 4.3.4 The Ultimate Chaos God ending

To finish this ending the following requirements must be met: the PC enters the Chaos Gate 
as a crowned C- Champion of Chaos wearing the Crown and Medal of Chaos and wielding the TotRR. 
The PC must not be intrinsically doomed or cursed other than due to wearing the Chaos 
artifacts. The PC must be extremely corrupted (the game will inform you when the PC is 
extremely corrupted). Kill Andor Drakon while wielding the TotRR.
