# 4.1 Andor Drakon

Andor Drakon is the ElDeR cHaOs GoD, the source of all the trouble in Ancardia. He resides 
on the ChAoS plane, which lies beyond the chaos gate. Any PC who wants to attempt a special 
ending will have to face him. The requirements for passing through the chaos gate vary 
according to alignment and whether the PC wants to attempt the normal chaos god ending or 
an ultra ending, and are detailed in the sections regarding the endings.

It is a good idea to remove the Chaos artifacts necessary for gate passage immediately upon 
arrival on the ChAoS plane. Furthermore, drop them. They are no longer needed and only 
serve to further corrupt the PC, which is going to happen rapidly anyway because of the 
corrupting nature of the ChAoS plane. Read all scrolls of chaos resistance. Drink all 
potions of cure corruption.

Andor Drakon is, as might be imagined, a formidable enemy. He is fast, with a speed of 217 
the last time it was checked several gammas ago. He is invisible. He casts what are 
apparently death rays, has a corrupting melee attack in addition to the naturally 
corrupting chaos plane, paralyzes, summons, casts darkness, teleports and drains stats and 
power points at a fearsome rate.

His speed was gleaned from the Monster Memory which is otherwise not helpful, stating that 
he is beyond description. He also seems to be immune to the effects of a blessed 
stethoscope.

How to deal with him?  Have a massively powerful melee attack.  Drink all stat boosting 
potions prior to gate entry.  Be very, very fast, the faster the better, preferably speed 
should be intrinsically above 200 and boosted above 400.  Have excellent PV and DV.  Have 
every resistance possible.  If the PC is not paralyzation resistant, an amulet of free 
action (or the Boots of the Divine Messenger, for instance) is essential.  A light source 
is essential.  He is vulnerable to humanoid slaying ammo.  He has been killed in many 
different ways, including using the Acid Ball spell in a previous gamma version of the game.  
Relying on spells on the chaos plane is not currently recommended, since Andor Drakon now 
drains PP very rapidly and claims that using magic strengthens him.  In practice use of 
magic seems to make him faster.  Prayer is definitely something to be avoided on the ChAoS 
plane under any circumstances.  It causes greater balors to be summoned.

If a PC has much trouble on D: 50, it does not bode well as far as defeating Andor Drakon 
goes. He often defeats PC's who have *no* trouble on D: 50 (but are perhaps not as spoiled 
as those reading this).

