# 4.2 The Chaos God ending

The Chaos God ending was the first special ending available in ADOM, as of gamma 6 (?). 
Today it has become kind of old-fashioned. Victory posts with "ordinary" Chaos Gods are few 
and far between. One reason it has fallen out of favor is because the future history of the 
PC after winning is bleak: after going to all the trouble necessary to even meet, much less 
defeat Andor Drakon, the PC revels in his glory for some time but is ultimately vanquished 
by a Champion of Law. Still, it is the only means of accessing a special ending if 
Khelavaster cannot be saved, which is very difficult. It is also the only way to achieve a 
special ending with a pure chaotic: a PC that starts chaotic and stays that way for the 
entire game. That in itself is quite an accomplishment.

## 4.2.1 Requirements

In order to achieve the Chaos God ending the PC must meet several requirements. These are 
checked during passage through the Chaos Gate. He must be C-. He must be a crowned Champion 
of Chaos. He must be extremely corrupted (the game will inform you when the PC is extremely 
corrupted). If these criteria are not met, the PC is shredded to pieces by any of several 
guardians or the millions of Chaos denizens Andor Drakon has collected (the exact guardian 
who kills the PC will have to wait for further testing, however, from memory, it is 
something like multi-tentacled horrors of unspeakable might check C- alignment, a chaos 
knight checks for crowned Champion of Chaos and says "I bow before thee, my lord!" if the 
requirement is met and the millions of Chaos denizens check the requirement for extremely 
corrupted; a successful check causes them to chant "One of us! One of us!"). Further, the 
PC must have the Chaos Trinity properly equipped: wear the Crown and Medal of Chaos, wield 
the Sceptre of Chaos in the right hand, leave the left hand empty. If this requirement is 
not met, Andor Drakon blasts the PC to oblivion. A successful check results in a message 
from Andor Drakon along the lines of "You seem to be wearing the insignia correctly. iT 
wIlL bE a PlEaSuRe To ShReD yOu In MeLeE!" If all of this is met, the PC winds up on the 
ChAoS plane to face Andor Drakon. The PC must be wielding the Sceptre of Chaos when Andor 
Drakon dies, although it is probably not necessary to kill him with the Sceptre 
(beastfighters would have difficulty doing this, but not killing him with a missile weapon 
while wielding the Sceptre).

