# 2.10 The Gremlin Cave

The Gremlin Cave is located in the southwest corner of the Drakalor Chain. It contains 
guaranteed items: the Phial of Caladriel, which is an artifact potion, fluff balls, which 
turn into gremlins when exposed to water, and a climbing set. There are messages generated 
when the PC enters the Gremlin Cave: "You feel watched. You shiver. You shiver really bad! 
It's dark here!". The Gremlin Cave is dark and filled with water traps, which, when 
triggered by the gremlins, cause them to multiply. Things can get out of control quickly in 
this cave due to the rapid replication of the gremlins. The objective is to retrieve the 
Phial of Caladriel and optionally the climbing set. There is another guaranteed climbing 
set in the Pyramid (section 2.9). The Phial is located in the farthest possible corner 
from the entrance.

The cave is dark and gremlins are damaged by the Light spell and wands of light. An amulet 
of light, a torch, adequate castings of the Light spell or many wands of light are 
necessary simply to see and navigate the cave. The spell or wands can also be used to kill 
gremlins. If the PC is fairly buff, the Gremlin Cave can be used to train weapon skills, 
since a potentially infinite number of gremlins will be generated. They are not 
particularly difficult for a mid-level PC to kill until the PC has killed thousands.

Since there are a potentially endless number of gremlins available, it is also possible to 
use the Pick Pockets skill indefinitely. This will both train the skill and satisfy Yergius 
regarding the PC's proficiency as a thief. Bear in mind also the always-present possibilty 
of pickpocketing a truly outstanding item. While it is very rare, artifacts have been 
pickpocketed this way.

Note that it is in no way necessary to enter this cave to complete the game. It is simply 
a source of an expendable artifact which can be sacrificed, given to the demented ratling 
or sold. The climbing set is also useful of course, especially if the PC has missed the 
opportunity to enter the Pyramid.
