# 2.2 The Arena

The Arena level is found around D: 4. As might be expected at a huge attraction like the 
Arena, there are vendors selling items on this level.  The other guaranteed monster 
on the level is the Arena Master, who provides access to the Arena.  Note that he will 
not admit invisible PCs to the Arena, whether or not they have fought in the Arena 
before. He responds with "Sorry, we've hired more than enough invisible stalkers. Look 
for a job elsewhere or come back when some of yer pals are used up."

The Arena itself is for combat practice, with the rewards for a successful fight being 
gold pieces. The rewards get larger as the PC wins more fights. A PC should not fight 
more than nineteen times in the Arena before descending to deeper levels of the CoC. This 
is because he will encounter an NPC later who assigns a quest to win the 20th Arena fight. 
The 20th fight will be against a named former champion. These opponents are more difficult 
than the standard Arena opponents. There are four possibilities:

* Li-Hon-Kay: ogre magus, uses invisibility and Frost Bolt, alternate name Li-Han-Kay
* Spardakius: minotaur, brute force
* Ripclaw: troll, brute force
* Bonk: hill giant, brute force

Li-Hon-Kay can be particularly annoying and dangerous. PCs without cold resistance and the 
ability to see invisible will probably not survive a fight with Li-Hon-Kay. Fortunately, 
cold immunity and the ability to see invisible are granted by the Ancient Mummy Wrapping, 
an artifact armor held by Rehetep, the Mummy Lord (see section 2.9). Players who want to 
be conservative and maximize the chances of survival in the 20th Arena fight will tackle 
the Pyramid first. Note also that although ogre magi are somewhat resistant to confusion, 
if one is successfully confused using Mindcraft, they are unable to become invisible. This 
works for Li-Hon-Kay as well as ordinary ogre magi. The other 20th fight Arena opponents 
will fall to offensive magic or simple brute force bashing.

There are a limited number of fights available after the 20th fight, but beware: anything 
can be generated as an opponent in such fights. It is quite possible to be faced with an 
emperor lich or ancient karmic dragon. The monetary rewards for such fights are about 1000 
gold pieces each, not worth it if the PC has to face a difficult opponent.

Timofei Shatrov has determined the possible opponents the PC will face in the Arena.  There 
are five possible opponents in each fight, although some of them are duplicates.  The table 
below shows the possible opponents, with cats in capitals and duplicates in parentheses:

POSSIBLE ARENA MONSTERS:

Number | First | Second | Third | Fourth | Fifth
--- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
 1 | giant rat     |  kobold          |  rat           |  goblin       |  (giant rat)
 2 | giant rat     |  kobold          |  orc           |  goblin       |  (giant rat)
 3 | gnoll	       |  hobgoblin	      |  orc           |  rabid dog    |  (hobgoblin)
 4 | gnoll         |  orc scorcher    |  hobgoblin     |  skeleton     |  zombie		
 5 | gnoll         |  orc scorcher    |  lizard man    |  fire beetle  |  giant bat
 6 | ghul          |  black hurthling |  WILD CAT      |  wolf         |  giant bat
 7 | ghul          |  black hurthling |  hyena         |  large kobold |  jackal
 8 | ghul          |  orc scorcher    |  large gnoll   |  large kobold |  bugbear
 9 | ogre          |  large orc       |  large gnoll   |  shadow       |  wererat
10 | ogre          |  large orc       |  kobold chief  |  shadow       |  werewolf
11 | large spider  |  cave fisher     |  orc chieftain |  ankheg       |  gnoll chief 
12 | kobold shaman |  dwarf           |  orc chieftain |  ankheg       |  giant spider
13 | kobold shaman |  dwarf           |  orc chieftain |  ankheg       |  giant spider
14 | imp           |  displacer beast |  orc chieftain |  quasit       |  CAVE LION
15 | cave bear     |  displacer beast |  minotaur      |  hippogriff   |  jackalwere
16 | cave bear     |  displacer beast |  minotaur      |  hippogriff   |  jackalwere
17 | cave bear     |  dire wolf       |  minotaur      |  harpy        |  giant lizard
18 | cave bear     |  dark sage       |  tarantula     |  fire lizard  |  hell hound 
19 | cave bear     |  dark sage       |  tarantula     |  fire lizard  |  dark elven warrior

## 2.2.1 Ratling traders

There are several ratling traders on the Arena level who sell food. The best food source 
is cooked lizards, which weigh only 3 stones each and are very nutritious. Also available 
are fried bats, which are less nutritious but still acceptable. It is not worth buying rat 
tails or cooked roaches. They have a negative nutrition value, even for trolls, who can 
eat almost anything.

In contrast to shops, which restock dependent on total game time passed, the ratling 
traders seem to restock dependent on game passed on the Arena level only. Thus a PC may go 
off adventuring for many days, return to the Arena and find no new food available. Wait or 
run around on the level for a while and the traders should eventually restock.

It is worthwhile to 'n'ame the ratling traders according to the wares they sell. This 
prevents aimless searching for the traders who sell worthwhile food. They can also be 
slowed down with the Slow Monster spell, which will not turn them hostile.


## 2.2.2 Cats in the Arena

Cats in the Arena are a special problem.  If the PC wants the Ring of the Master Cat, 
directly killing cats must be avoided (see section 0.9.2).  There are several ways to deal 
with cats in the Arena.  Teleportation is one, from a wand or spell.  Potions of exchange 
thrown at a cat will turn it into another monster.  A cat can be led over a trap until it 
is killed, teleported or turned into a writhing mass of primal chaos.  However, if the PC 
creates or sets off a trap which kills a cat, he is charged with killing the cat. Thus 
teleportation and corruption traps are really the only useful traps worth creating as far 
as cats are concerned. Indeed, the PC should be careful about creating *any* traps in the 
Arena, since a subsequently generated cat could be killed by the trap (even after the 20th 
fight). For this reason, as well as general tactical information, it is useful to know the 
layout of traps in the Arena when they are created.  A map showing the traps produced when 
the Arena is generated on D: 3 is shown below:
```
  ###############.###############
  #0123456789AB0###456789AB01234#
  #123456789AB0123456789AB012345#
  #23456789AB0123456789AB0123456#
  #3456789AB0123456789AB01234567#
  ###############################

    0 - fireball      6 - arrow
    1 - pit           7 - acid
    2 - light         8 - pit (vipers)
    3 - corruption    9 - spear
    4 - stone block   A - teleport
    5 - alarm         B - water
```
The pattern shifts, but otherwise remains the same, and can therefore be worked out by 
creating a single trap, when the Arena is generated on other levels.

