# 2.21 The High Mountain Village - part two

## 2.21.1 The Stone Giant Lord

Sometimes there is a Stone Giant Lord generated outside the High Mountain Village walls 
near where the PC enters from the wilderness. Needless to say, this can be a nasty surprise 
for a relatively low level PC who has descended through the Unremarkable Dungeon at the 
beginning of the game. If you can't run away, an attack with berserk tactics may work if 
the PC has a decent weapon. He is vulnerable to magic.

## 2.21.2 Hawkslayer

The burly adventurer in the High Mountain Village will join a PC and act as a companion 
providing certain criteria are met: the PC must not be chaotic and the player (*not* the PC) 
must know a secret password ("Iceberg"). The only way to learn the password in ADOM itself 
is drinking from pools, and many players are reluctant to do so. Some players may remember 
Hawkslayer from the computer RPG "Bard's Tale III". The password is the same in that game.  
There is also an experience level requirement which is uncertain.  Level 25 PC's have 
successfully gotten Hawkslayer as a companion, so that stands as a maximum level for the 
requirement at the moment.

Hawkslayer is not super-buff as companions go, but he is not bad.

On arriving at the HMV with a level 15 PC and using a blessed stethoscope on him, 
Hawkslayer was found to be:

You examine Hawkslayer, the burly adventurer. Diagnosis: Level: 1, DV: 24, PV: 15, Hits: 355, Attacks: 1, Damage: 14-50. Speed: 120.

A report from the Russian ADOM newsgroup on September 14th, 2000 described a PC who was 
very careful with Hawkslayer to start, training him in the upper levels of the CoC, 
proceeding to the Big Room then deeper into the CoC until he was able to take on molochs 
and balors. Using a blessed stethoscope on him at that point gave the following:

You examine Hawkslayer, the burly adventurer. Diagnosis: Level: 110, DV: 96, PV: 36, Hits: 805, Attacks: 11, Damage: 50-86. Speed:120.

Quite impressive.

Hawkslayer uses arrows which can be retrieved for the PC's own use.

## 2.21.3 Ratling guardians

Two ratling guardians are found at the entrance to the city. They seem to be flavor 
elements more than anything else and play no real role in the plot of the game.

## 2.21.4 Leggot

Leggot is the shopkeeper in the High Mountain Village. He may offer better prices than 
Waldenbrook, the shopkeeper in Dwarftown, both when selling items and buying items. He does 
not share Waldenbrook's hatred of dark elves.

## 2.21.5 Ogre guardian

Like the ratling guardians, the ogre guardian plays no real part in the game. He guards a 
prison in the High Mountain Village which holds a few monsters. The ogre guardian does not 
react if the PC opens the jail and kills the monsters within.  If the ogre guardian becomes 
hostile, he is capable of throwing huge rocks at the PC.

## 2.21.6 Gaab'Baay

Gaab'Baay is of critical importance for those attempting a special ending. She assigns 
several quests; the reward is the Medal of Chaos, which is required to pass through the 
Chaos Gate. She will assign quests only to PCs with chaotic alignment. She will not assign 
quests until the demented ratling has been given six artifacts ("Talk to the mutated 
one."). Her quests are as follows: 1) Bring her the skull of a giant boar. An annoying 
quest. Giant boars can only be found randomly in the wilderness, and rarely leave skulls, 
even for PCs that have Food Preservation at 100. This quest can literally take months of 
game time to complete, causing elapsed game time to exceed the 90 day point at which time 
background corruption starts to accelerate. 2) Bring a potion of cure corruption. These can 
be obtained from Guth'Alak (see section 0.10.2.1.1). It is worth taking the time to get one 
from Guth'Alak, since they are very rare otherwise. 3) Bring the corpse of a farmer. Quite 
often a farmer will be wandering around the outside of the High Mountain Village. Otherwise 
they can be found in Terinyo. It is widely believed that farmers will never leave a corpse 
until this quest is assigned, and leave a corpse every time after this quest is assigned. 
So if you are playing a wild chaotic, use some restraint and don't wipe out all farmers 
just because they are easy to kill. It might also be prudent to kill off the stone giant 
lord outside the HMV if one is generated. You don't want him killing off your farmer. There 
has been a recent report (October 13th, 2000) concerning a farmer that did *not* leave a 
corpse after receiving this quest, so it may be a matter of strong probability rather than 
certainity. 4) Bring a scroll of danger. Another scarce item. If the PC finds one, it 
should be put somewhere safe until it is needed. 5) Bring a wand of monster creation. Note 
that a cursed wand of monster creation will work, but one with zero charges left will not. 
After successfully delivering all of these items, Gaab'Baay produces the Medal of Chaos. 
Note that it, like all parts of the Chaos Trinity, corrupts the PC merely by carrying it. 
Leave it somewhere safe until it is needed.

## 2.21.7 The Oracle

The Oracle dispenses advice to PCs with all three parts of the Chaos Trinity about 
how to become a chaos god. However, it is no longer necessary to have all three 
parts of the Chaos Trinity to enter the Chaos Gate. Interaction with the Oracle in 
ADOM 1.0.0 has not been thoroughly investigated.

The corpse of the Oracle grants +6 to Learning but also curses and dooms the PC.
Beware of attacking the Oracle.  She is capable of casting Death Ray and shares the 
properties of karmic beings, although she is not named as such.

## 2.21.8 The malicious doctor

The malicious doctor has a flesh golem companion for sale for 25,000 gold pieces. He plays 
no other part in the game. From the reports of those who have acquired this companion, it 
is not worth the money. If the player wants this companion, it is worth luring the malicious 
doctor to the SMC before buying it. In that case it is generated with much more experience.

Note that the malicious doctor will not sell this companion to lawful PCs.  When lawful 
PCs 'C'hat with him, the game responds with "The malicious doctor eyes you with 
suspicion.  "My office is closed." "

## 2.21.9 Ratling traders

Ratling traders are occasionally generated in the High Mountain Village. Like many other 
random monsters in the High Mountain Village, they are quite often hostile. If the PC needs 
food at this point, don't kill hostile ratling traders. They may eventually become 
nonhostile and therefore a source of food.

## 2.21.10 Hidden locations

There are three hidden locations in the High Mountain Village.  Gaab'Baay is located in 
a hidden passageway along the eastern wall.  Two scrolls are located in the doorless 
room in the center of the northern wall.  The only way to enter this room is with 
teleportation.  Note that teleportation traps may be conveniently generated adjacent to 
and within the room:
```
  #######
  .#.?.#.
  .#^..#.
  .#####.
  ^......
```
The carets represent locations where a teleportation trap may be created.  A teleportation 
trap can also be created on the square where the scrolls lie, of course.

The two scrolls are a cursed scroll of chaos resistance and a "strange 
message".  See section 5.2 for the contents.  The final location is a hidden passage in 
the western wall.  It contains a potion of ultra healing and a staircase behind yet 
another hidden door.  The staircase leads to the northern central part of the wilderness.

