# 2.25 The Infinite Dungeon

The Infinite Dungeon is found in the southeastern part of the wilderness map. Prior to 
entering it, the description is "A tiny, strangely distorted cave entry."

The Infinite Dungeon (ID) is truly infinite for all practical purposes. The level number is 
limited by some 32 or 64 bit integer value, but who really cares about that? It would take 
many lifetimes to descend through all its levels, even assuming a PC could survive such a 
trip, which is impossible. The danger level increases with dungeon level; any level greater 
than 200 or so becomes ridiculous.

The ID has some unique characteristics: shops, altars and pools are never generated. Every 
dungeon level is randomly generated, so leaving a level and reentering it results in a 
completely new dungeon level. There is one special level, the SIL, where MaLaKaI resides.

According to the Mad Minstrel, the ID was originally a monument built by the powers of law. 
The incursion of Chaos into Ancardia has twisted it into its current condition.

## 2.25.1 Filk

Filk is found in the ID on the level corresponding to the number of first-killed monsters 
killed. For example if the first monster killed was a rat and 225 rats have been killed, 
Filk will be found on I: 225. Filk is a quickling bard and the fastest quickling in the 
game with a speed of 1500. His DV/PV is 500/0. He shares the properties of karmics although 
he is not named as such. More about obtaining the Filk quest is found in section 4.3.1.1.

## 2.25.2 MaLaKaI

MaLaKaI resides in the SIL, found at about level 66 of the ID. He is a chaos knight and 
guards the Sceptre of Chaos. The SIL is not really part of the ID. It is discovered by 
descending through the ID normally, but once left, it can never be found again. This means 
if a PC needs the Sceptre of Chaos, there is only one chance to get it, so be prepared. 
MaLaKaI is quite tough. He is designed to be an opponent for characters above level 40. He 
has a corrupting melee attack.

Conclusive proof that the SIL is not part of the ID is the fact that altars are sometimes 
generated in the SIL. These can come in very handy since MaLaKaI can be sacrificed.
