# 2.4 The Si

The si (abbreviation for strange item, pronounced "see") is the first guaranteed 
artifact that most PCs will encounter, unless they have done the Keethrax quest.  
It is usually found on level 8 of the CoC.  The level message "The air of this 
level is filled with a strange smell." is always generated when entering the level 
containing the si.  It falls into the tool category and is thus represented by a ] 
character.  It always lies on a trap, so kick it off of the trap before picking it 
up if possible.

The si is an artifact that replicates.  Since they are artifacts, they are: 

1. indestructible - wield them as a melee weapon to prevent corrosion/damage from jellies if nothing better is available
2. valuable - sell them to shopkeepers: potentially limitless cash
3. sacrificial fodder - sacrifice them to the gods, although it may be more beneficial to sell them and sacrifice the gold

All of these properties together make sis rather nice items.  Always keep at least 
one.

Note that sis do not count as an artifact as far as the demented ratling is 
concerned.  Also never forget that they replicate.  They can get heavy after a 
while.  A particularly nasty effect results if sis are brought into the ID.  
On a long trip through the ID, sis will replicate to the point where they become 
annoyingly heavy.  This would not be a problem if the PC could simply drop most of 
them.  Unfortunately, they jump back into the PC's backpack before he leaves a 
level, no matter where on the level they were dropped.  Bottom line: *never* bring 
sis into the ID.

