# 2.12 The Tomb of the High Kings


The Tomb of the High Kings is located in a dungeon found in the northwest corner of the 
Drakalor Chain. The PC must have a climbing set to reach it (and to leave that section of 
the map). The fact that a climbing set is required means that the PC must do some work to 
find one prior to entering the dungeon. This ensures that brand new PCs do not enter this 
location. The dungeon consists of two normal levels followed by three cavernous levels 
leading to the tomb. The cavernous levels are somewhat challenging, as are most cavernous 
levels.

The tomb itself consists of a short winding corridor leading to a large chamber. The 
chamber contains a lake which is unique in that the water is red rather than blue. This 
should serve as a warning. It is filled with chaos piranhas that deal over 200 points of 
damage during each turn the PC is in the lake. This is the place where the Bridge Building 
skill or the ability to freeze water (yielded by the Terinyo quests) becomes vital.

Teleportation is not allowed on this level, so do not count on it to get your PC out of a 
tight spot.

The PC must build a bridge or create an ice bridge to an island located in the lake. 
Remember that ice bridges will only hold the PC's weight plus 2000 stones before breaking. 
On the island is a 1 x 1 room protected by a locked and trapped door. Upon opening the 
door, a skeletal king is found guarding the Ring of the High Kings. The skeletal king is a 
somewhat nasty foe who is able to confuse the PC. This is not a good thing when the PC is 
perched on a bridge, liable to stumble to certain death in the piranha infested waters 
below. Some means of confusion resistance is therefore highly recommended. The skeletal 
king is immune to the chaos piranahs so luring him into the lake will not kill him. He is 
vulnerable to undead slaying ammo, of course. He is not difficult to kill in melee for a 
mid-level PC with a decent melee attack.

The objective of this dungeon, the Ring of the High Kings, 
is Greater Identified as follows:

-------------------- 
blessed ring of the High Kings [+2, +3]
-------------------

It is an artifact.

When worn it modifies DV by +2 and PV by +3.
When used in melee combat it grants a +0 bonus to hit and causes 1d1 points of 
damage. When used as a missile it grants a +0 bonus to hit and causes 1d1 points 
of damage.

It grants resistance to fire.
It grants resistance to poison.
It grants resistance to cold.
It grants resistance to shock attacks.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Greater Identify does not reveal the most important property of the ring, however: 
it allows peaceful passage past the Eternal Guardian (see section 3.3).

Here is an ASCII map of the Tomb of the High Kings, showing the shortest route to the 
island formed with an ice bridge:


                                                                    #####
                       ###############                              #...#
              ##########.............#######                        #@<.#
           ####............................#####                    #...#
         ###...................................##                #####.##
         #.............============.............###              #.....#
       ###.........===================............#              #.#####
       #.........=======================.........### #######     #.####
       #.........==========###===========..........###.....#     #....#
       ###.......==========#./===========..............###.##### ####.#
        #.........=========####==========..........##### #.#...#    #.#
        ##..........==========#========...........##     #.#.#.#    #.#
         ###...........=======#====...........#####      #...#.######.#
           ###.............................####          #####........#
             #####.....................#####                 ##########
                 #######################

