# 2.13 The Water Dragon's Lair

The water dragon's lair is located in a random water-containing square of the wilderness. 
It contains Shyssiryxius, the water dragon (Blup's mother), her treasure hoard and various 
other aquatic beasts. It consists of a labyrinth and a central room containing 
Shyssiryxius and the treasure. The entire cave is submerged, so ordinarily some means of 
water breathing and the swimming skill are required. The most common method of obtaining 
water breathing is through a helm of water breathing (generally a "blue helmet" before 
identification). Wearing two rings of the fish also grants this, although they are 
autocursing. If the PC is not born with the swimming skill, it can be obtained from Blup 
by giving him potions of carrot juice. The need for these abilities ordinarily keeps low 
level PCs out of the lair, which is as it should be. The aquatic beasts found in the 
labyrinth are not trivial, especially the dragon turtles. Sharks and giant eels can also 
be found.

In theory a PC with on demand teleportation, high hit points and possibly some regeneration 
could survive a teleport to Shyssiryxius, a chat and a teleport to the up stairs without 
water breathing or swimming.

There are two main reasons for entering. The first is to 'C'hat with Shyssiryxius then 
return to Terinyo. This allows the PC to inform Blup about the location of his mother, 
which results in eventual delivery of the rune-covered trident, a decent artifact weapon 
and missile, later in the game. The trident is delivered not long after reaching character 
level 16 for PCs born in the Raven starsign. Others have to wait until level 36. The 
location of the lair is not decided until the PC starts searching for it, so it is more or 
less possible to place it in a convenient location, such as near Terinyo.

The second reason for entering the lair is to loot it. There are occasionally outstanding 
items found in the treasure hoard. As might be expected, Shyssiryxius does not take kindly 
to thieves and will attack.

Note that delivery of the rune-covered trident is guaranteed once the PC informs Blup of 
Shyssiryxius' location. The PC may then proceed to loot the cave, or indeed even kill 
Shyssiryxius without forfeiting the rune-cavered trident.


## 2.13.1 Shyssiryxius

Under normal circumstances, Shyssiryxius is not hostile, only intimidating.  If she is 
'C'hatted with, she roars "HAST YE SEEN MY BABY?" (or "*DIE*" if the PC has done something 
to make her hostile).  Whether she is hostile or not, the PC can leave after chatting and 
report back to Blup.  This of course assumes a PC facing her when she is hostile survives 
(see below).  If the PC attempts to steal from her treasure hoard, she gives a warning about 
not picking anything up.  If the PC persists, she will attack.  She is a formidable opponent 
with a reasonably powerful melee attack and a deadly water breath attack that is capable of 
dealing circa 100 points of damage in a single round.  She regenerates and is immune to cold.  
She is capable of teleporting and does so when she panics, making the PC work to find her 
while remaining underwater the whole time.  She can be killed, but it takes an upper level 
PC, and it doesn't hurt to have some blessed potions of extra healing along.
