# 2.14.1 Saving Khelavaster

At this time the PC must make a choice about saving Khelavaster. He is on the down 
staircase and it is impossible to descend further without saving him or allowing him to 
die. It is however, possible to ascend, leaving the level in its state as found for an 
indefinite period of time. He can only be saved by giving him an amulet of life saving 
*before* 'C'hatting with him. There is no guaranteed way to obtain an amulet of life saving 
and they are very rare items. If the player is determined to attempt an ultra ending, 
Khelavaster must be saved since he is the only one capable of summoning the Trident of the 
Red Rooster.

Common methods of attempting to get an amulet of life saving include staying in the 
infinite dungeon until one is generated or draining every pool the PC has found in the 
hopes of obtaining a wish. A ring of djinni summoning may also be generated in the infinite 
dungeon, which provides a wish when blessed.


## 2.14.2 Khelavaster's gifts

In any case, Khelavaster reveals a bit about the plot of the game including the existence 
of the chaos orbs and their general locations. He also leaves some equipment for the PC. 
The equipment he leaves depends on whether he is saved or dies. The equipment is 
guaranteed, but if he is allowed to die the exact status varies. Three examples are shown 
below.

* cursed robe [+0, +1]
* uncursed boots of sneakiness [+0, +2] {Dx +2}
* blessed amulet of protection +2
* uncursed eternium dagger (+0, 2d4+7)
* cursed wand of digging (4 charges)
* cursed potion of invisibility
* 474 gold pieces
 
* uncursed robe [+0, +1]
* uncursed boots of sneakiness [+0, +0] {Dx+5}
* uncursed amulet of protection +2
* uncursed eternium dagger (+1, 2d4+7)
* uncursed wand of digging (4 charges)
* uncursed potion of invisibility
* 271 gold pieces
 
* uncursed robe [+0, +1]
* uncursed boots of sneakiness [+0, +0] {Dx+2}
* uncursed amulet of protection +2
* cursed eternium dagger (+0, 2d4+7)
* uncursed wand of digging (4 charges)
* cursed potion of invisibility
* 406 gold pieces

If Khelavaster is saved, the equipment he leaves is (almost) exactly the same every time:

* blessed eternium dagger (+0, 2d4+7)
* blessed wand of digging (8 charges)
* heap of 4 blessed potions of ultra healing
* heap of 6 blessed scrolls of chaos resistance
* blessed spellbook of Identify
* blessed spellbook of Teleportation

Note the quality of this equipment. The six blessed scrolls of chaos resistance alone are 
roughly equal to two wishes. Thus it is definitely worth spending a wish to obtain an 
amulet of life saving for Khelavaster.

The exact stats of the eternium dagger may vary. A recent report (Feb 26, 2001) revealed 
that the dagger may be as good as (+0, 2d4+10).

If Khelavaster is saved, he reappears in invisible form in Terinyo late in the game. If the 
PC gives him the crumpled scroll, obtained by killing the Emperor Moloch, he will summon 
the TotRR for non-chaotics. There is apparently an experience level requirement in order 
for Khelavaster to appear in Terinyo, but the PC does not need to have the crumpled scroll.
