# 2.18 Darkforge

Darkforge is an important location in the game. It is not a location for low level PCs. 
The entrance to Darkforge is described as "A long and non-descript tunnel." The first 
level of the dungeon is not particularly dangerous except for the presence of a steel 
golem guarding the down staircase. Steel golems are very tough monsters for a mid-level 
PC. If the PC has trouble with the steel golem guarding the down staircase, flee. There 
are many more guarding Darkforge itself. Upon entering Darkforge, the message "You smell 
the reek of sulphur, steel and oil." is generated. The steel golems that guard Darkforge 
are unlife and thus immune to Mindcraft. They are vulnerable to missiles of construct 
slaying, but it is almost unheard of to find enough such ammo to take them all out by this 
point in the game. They are vulnerable to Lightning, from the spell or wand, although it 
will take many castings or charges to kill all of them. Steel golems will shrug off many 
lightning attacks, but can eventually be killed this way. They breathe fire, so both the 
PC and his equipment need to be protected from fire. Many players will attempt Darkforge 
just before assaulting the Tower of Eternal Flames, in order to determine whether their 
PC has a good chance in the ToEF.

Darkforge is a very good way of gaining experience levels for PCs that can deal with the 
steel golems. A typical non-troll PC that manages to clear Darkforge of the initially 
generated steel golems will gain at least five experience levels - very useful when about 
to attempt the ToEF.

Here is an ASCII map of Darkforge. Note the caches of weapons, armor (it is possible to 
obtain artifact weapons and armor from these rooms) and gold, the room containing pools 
(which are not always generated in this pattern), the hidden room containing the Crown of 
Science (the lone [ ), the shortcut to the lower CoC and the nine forges.

```
                    ###########                                          #####
           ##########.#.......#      ##################                  #...#
  ######   #.......##.#######.#      #...........+[[[[############# ######.<.#
  #.+..### #.#####.##.....# #.#  #####+###########[[[[##.+...=0===# #...##...#
  #.###..###.#   #.##+############.........###   #[[[[##.####=000=# ###.###.##
  #$$$##..##.#   #............##.............#   #[[[[##.#  #00===#####.##...#
  #$$$###..#.### ######+##.#####......&......###########.#  #=====##.##.###.##
 #########.#...#######..##.####......&.&......##.........#  ########.##.##...#
 #.......#...#.#....##.##.....+.....&.&.&.....+#.############      #.##.###.##
 #.###########...##.##.##.#####......&.&......##.# #........#      #....##.@.#
 #.################..+....#   ##......&......###.######.############.######.##
 #.##.#.#.#.#.#.################.............# #...#  #....##....#...#   #...#
 #.................#   #(((((((###.........### ###.#  ####.##.####.########.##
 ####.#.#.#.#.#.##.##  #(((((((# #####+#####     #.####.##.##.## #.##.......#
    #############...#  #(((((((#######.#         #......##.....# #.##.#######
       #...#    #.>.#  #(((((((+.......#         #################.##.#
       #.[.#    #...#  #################                      #.......#
       #####    #####                                         #########
```

It is not wise to spend inordinate amounts of time in Darkforge - for example smithing. 
Darkforge has a higher than normal rate of background corruption.


## 2.18.1 Kherab

Kherab is the dwarven artificer found in Darkforge. He is presumably the creator of the 
steel golems, steel horrors and animated armors found in Darkforge. He is quite tough, 
with hitpoints numbering in the hundreds and a powerful melee attack. He holds two items 
necessary for smithing: a hammer and an anvil. He is the source of two quests outlined 
below.


## 2.18.2 Kherab's quests and their rewards

Kherab is the source of two chaotic quests. The first is to kill Guth'Alak, the druid 
found in Terinyo. This of course removes Guth'Alak as a source of potions of cure 
corruption and as the source of the Unicorn quest. Depending on how it is accomplished, 
the entire village of Terinyo may become hostile as well. If this happens, it may destroy 
any chance the PC has to obtain the TotRR. The reward for this quest is the corrupting 
artifact amulet of raw steel. The second quest is to kill Thrundarr, the village elder in 
Dwarftown. This can have all sorts of negative effects as well, including turning all of 
Dwarftown hostile and the killing of the demented ratling. The reward for this quest is 
the corrupting shield of raw steel.

The quest rewards are useful only because they are artifacts. They can be fed to the 
demented ratling, for instance. They are too corrupting to be useful otherwise. These 
"rewards" are not really rewards. Kherab is an evil chaotic being and wants the PC dead. 
Giving away corrupting artifacts is his way of trying to accomplish this.

