# 2.19 The Tower of Eternal Flames

The Tower of Eternal Flames, found in the Wilderness, is probably the nastiest place in 
the game given the experience level of PCs who must visit it. The layout of the Fire 
Temple itself, found on the uppermost of four levels, on the right side of the level, is 
as follows:

```
  #######
  #.....#                                       #########
  #.>...###       #############          ###### #.......###
  #.......#       #...........#         ##....# ###x......###
  #######.#   #####...........#         #.....#   ###.......#
        #.#   #.../...........#         ##...## ###........##
#########.#####.###...........#          ###..###..........#
#.......#.......# #...........#            ##.#..........###
#.......###.##### ###/#########            ##..............##
#......./...#       #.#                    #................###
#.......##### #######/#####                #........_.........##
#.......#     #...........#            ######..............##..##
#########     #...........#            #....#.##.........#####..#
              #...........#           ##......##.#########  ###.#
              #...........#           #......###........# ###...##
              #...........#           ##....## ####....## #......#
              #############            ######     ######  ########
```

The left side of the level is random. Note that the temple itself is disconnected. Entry 
must be made by digging.  Teleportation is not allowed on the level. Note the underscore 
in the center of the temple. This is the chaotic elemental altar where the orb guardian is 
found (at least until it is disturbed and moves). The elemental altars are very dangerous. 
The temples are populated by sentient beings who will sacrifice the PC instantly should he 
step on it. In addition, they can only be converted by champions of Balance or Order, which 
means PCs going for an ultra ending cannot convert them early in the game, before retrieving 
the Medal of Chaos. The monsters in the Fire Temple are arrayed as follows:.

```
  #######
  #.....#                                       #########
  #.>...###       #############          ###### #xxxxxxx###
  #.......#       #...........#         ##EEEE# ###xxxxxxx###
  #######.#   #####...........#         #EEEEE#   ###CD.&&.C#
        #.#   #.../...........#         ##EEE## ###&..&..&.##
#########.#####.###...........#          ###..###&.&&.&.&.C#
#.......#.......# #...........#            ##E#C..&..&...###
#.......###.##### ###/#########            ##&.&.&..&.&..&.##
#......./...#       #.#                    #C..&.&.DDD..&...###
#.......##### #######/#####                #..&.&..DWD.&.&..E.##
#.......#     #...........#            ######C.&.&.DDD&&...##.E##
#########     #...........#            #EEEE#E##..&..&.&.#####..#
              #...........#           ##EEEEEE##C#########  ###E#
              #...........#           #EEEEEE###CCCCCCCC# ###EEE##
              #...........#           ##EEEE## ####CCCC## #EEEEEE#
              #############            ######     ######  ########
```

PCs are denied entrance to the lower CoC until they have the Chaos Orb of Elemental Fire, 
held by the Ancient Chaos Wyrm in the ToEF, and the game stalls at this point. PCs can 
continue to gain experience levels by staying on available cavernous levels (for instance) 
in order to have a better chance in the Tower. Ultimately, however, boredom will set in and 
the PC will have to face the Tower. Obtaining the Fire Orb is a huge hurdle to get over and 
marks a division between the earlier, beginning parts of the game and the latter parts of 
the game. Some players also believe it marks the division between beginning and advanced 
players.

The Tower of Eternal Flames consists of four levels. They are all very, very hot. This 
causes damage to both the PC and his equipment, whether worn or in the pack. To protect the 
PC, fire resistance or immunity is necessary. See section 0.12.1 about fire resistance.

To protect the PC (other than drakelings, see below) completely from the heat in the ToEF, 
the PC must have four sources of fire resistance. Note that intrinsic fire resistance 
counts as two sources. Thus, for example, a PC with intrinsic fire resistance wearing a 
ring of fire resistance under the elemental gauntlets would take no damage from the heat in 
the Tower.

There are a number of artifacts that grant fire resistance or immunity. Two guaranteed 
examples are the elemental gauntlets (resistance) and the Crown of Science (immunity, but 
also dooms and curses). It is probably not worth wearing the Crown of Science unless the 
situation is desperate, since the bad luck it generates causes firproof blankets and rings 
of ice to fail much more often, in addition to the usual bad effects. There are several 
other nonguaranteed artifacts which grant resistance or immunity to fire. It is worth 
remembering that artifacts are indestructible and so cannot be damaged by the heat in the 
Tower.

Drakelings face special problems in the ToEF. The Mad Minstrel sings a song about this. 
Drakelings, even those with fire immunity, always take damage in the ToEF. This is not 
because of the heat itself but is a secondary effect due to the greatly increased 
metabolism drakelings will suffer from in the ToEF. There is no way around it. In order to 
survive, drakelings must have a means of regeneration or healing in the ToEF. Ideally an 
artifact that causes regeneration should be worn. An alternative is to bring blessed 
potions of extra healing along. It is possible for drakelings to do the ToEF with only 
three or four blessed PoEH if everything is done efficiently with no wasted time.

One technique drakelings (and other races for that matter) can use is to read a blessed 
scroll of magic mapping upon entering a new level of the ToEF followed by teleportation to 
the up stairway. Obviously the PC must have the necessary scrolls, wands or spell and 
teleport control.

The heat in the tower will destroy equipment that is vulnerable to fire. This includes most 
items that are not made of the higher metals mithril, adamantium and eternium. Artifacts 
are of course the exception.

If a PC must wear items vulnerable to fire, a blessed ring of ice is necessary. Uncursed 
rings of ice will not work, they must be blessed. Even with a blessed ring of ice, some 
equipment destruction may occur. Blessed rings of ice seem to protect to the 92-95% level. 
Even wearing two blessed rings of ice does not guarantee worn equipment will not be 
destroyed, although the protection seems to go up to 99+%. A ring of ice is of course not 
necessary if the PC wears only artifacts and items made of the higher metals. Missiles are 
an obvious problem. It is rare to find enough arrows made from higher metals to satisfy an 
archer in the ToEF, for instance. Even rocks are vulnerable to the heat, sometimes 
exploding. Non-artifact slings, bows and crossbows are liable to be burnt or melted. If the 
PC is not doomed or cursed, fireproof blankets (particularly blessed ones) are sufficient 
to protect the PC's pack. Fireproof blankets do not protect worn equipment, of course. If 
the PC is doomed or cursed, for instance from wearing the Crown of Science, which grants 
fire immunity, fireproof blankets seem to disintegrate much more readily.

This whole situation is very vexing, because the ToEF contains a very nasty collection of 
monsters and the PC naturally wants to bring his best equipment with him, but at the same 
time does not want it destroyed.

One thing to remember - rings are never destroyed until the gauntlets worn over them are 
destroyed. Since the artifact elemental gauntlets are available to all PCs, this provides a 
foolproof means of protecting nonartifact rings.

The objective in the ToEF is of course the Chaos Orb of Elemental Fire. It is held by the 
Ancient Chaos Wyrm who can be found on the top level of the ToEF. This level is typical of 
the levels containing elemental temples. The temple itself occupies half of the level and 
is disconnected. It can only be reached by digging. Teleportation is not allowed on the 
level. Since a PC may have his only means of digging destroyed on his way through the 
tower, praying on the top level will result in a pickaxe gift from the PC's god.

The temple itself is occupied by problematic monsters. These include fire elementals, 
chaos servants, fire grues, fire drakes and fire demons in addition to the orb guardian. 
The fire demons and fire grues in particular are annoying because they have a corrupting 
melee attack with a very high to-hit. Even PCs with excellent DV will be hit eventually. 
Taken as a whole, this means that invisibility is very, very desirable in the Fire Temple.

## 2.19.1 The Ancient Chaos Wyrm

The Ancient Chaos Wyrm holds the Chaos Orb of Elemental Fire, the key to the lower parts 
of the CoC. It has a fire breath attack and a corrupting melee attack. In addition it is 
able to cast confusion and an energy ray. It is able to heal its wounds. The ACW can be 
killed in a variety of ways including brute force, although it is preferable to attack it 
from a distance due to its corrupting melee attack. The ACW is vulnerable to cold attacks 
(as are most of the monsters in the temple) and dragon slaying ammo. If it is killed on 
the temple's altar, be extraordinarily careful! If the PC is visible the fire demons will 
sacrifice him instantly. Even if the PC is invisible, fire demons who have been engaged 
in melee will "know" where the PC is and sacrifice him. The safest thing to do is kick 
anything dropped on the altar to an adjacent square before picking it up. The elemental 
altars can only be converted by champions of Balance or Order, which means PCs going for 
an ultra ending cannot convert them early in the game, before retrieving the Medal of 
Chaos.

An examination of the Ancient Chaos Wyrm with a blessed stethoscope reveals:

* You examine the Ancient Chaos Wyrm. Diagnosis: Level: 1, DV: 50, PV: 20, Hits: 209, Attacks: 3, Damage: 15-51. Speed: 98.

