# 2.22 The Rift

The Rift is a wilderness location found in the northwestern mountains, southeast of the 
dungeon containing the Tomb of the High Kings.  The PC must meet several requirements in 
order to enter it.  A climbing set is required (although ADOM 1.0.0 and g16p2, at least, 
have a bug which causes this to be ignored) and the Climbing skill must be at 100.  The PC 
must be at least experience level 18.  If the experience level requirement is not met, the 
game responds with: "You do not feel experienced enough for this daunting task."  Willpower 
must be at least 20 OR Perception must be less than six. 

If all these requirements are met, the PC will still most likely fall on the way down the 
Rift, destroying some equipment in the process. Falling can be avoided by having the 
extremely thin and nimble AND the very light corruptions. This needs further testing. It 
may be that only the very light corruption is required, as per the fortune cookie message 
"Being light as a feather makes you very rifty." Alternatively, it may be that only 
hurthlings can avoid falling with only one of these corruptions, similar to the entrance 
requirements for the Quickling Tree. There are reportedly 27 luck checks on the way down, 
whatever that actually means. Being burdened or strained is probably not a good idea. A 
level 50 PC, not cursed or doomed, with intrinsic Lucky and Fate Smiles, wearing the ankh 
and the Ring of the Master Cat, unburdened, but without the requisite corruptions, still 
fell. It is not possible to bring artifacts only into the Rift, since a climbing set (and 
probably food, although enough *might* be found) is required. Therefore, it is a good idea 
to store the PC's extremely valuable items, such as scrolls of chaos resistance, in a safe 
place before entering the Rift. It is also a good idea to bring every bit of junk, such as 
missiles that do not stack, low quality armor and weapons, scrolls of ill fate, cure 
blindness and the like, low quality amulets, etc. along. These items are fodder for the 
RNG, which hopefully will destroy them rather than valuable equipment. Do not be too 
conservative and leave *all* good equipment behind, because the monsters in the Rift 
dungeon and especially the Sinister Library of Niltrias can be *very* nasty. Hopefully by 
this point, the PC has some decent artifact armor and weapons. A corollary is not to rush 
into the Rift too soon.

It is not necessary to visit the Rift dungeon or the Sinister Library of Niltrias to 
complete the game, and many who play non-spellcasters completely ignore it.

The whole point of entering the Rift is to gain access to the Sinister Library of Niltrias 
- see below.

## 2.22.1 The Rift dungeon

After the PC climbs (falls) down the Rift, he arrives in the Rift dungeon on RL3. The 
dungeon consists of nine levels, which are numbered in the opposite sense compared to every 
other dungeon in the game (the Tower of Eternal Flames is an exception) - RL1 is the 
bottom, while RL9 is the top. This dungeon features dangerous monsters - greater chaos 
servants, chaos mutants, elementals, greater elementals and higher level quicklings are not 
uncommon. Two up staircases will be found on RL5 or RL6. One leads to the higher Rift 
dungeon level, the other leads into the wilderness in a pass inside the unclimbable 
mountains. A short journey, which again requires a climbing set, leads to the entrance to 
the Sinister Library of Niltrias.

### 2.22.1.1 The ratling dealer

If the PC was unlucky enough to have his climbing set destroyed during the descent through 
the Rift, another is available from a unique ratling dealer on the bottom level of the Rift 
dungeon. This NPC is nonhostile in an otherwise rather hostile environment. As a 
consequence, it is quite possible for him to be killed by other monsters. If the PC needs a 
climbing set from him, find him quickly and be prepared to pay 50,000 gold pieces for it.


## 2.22.2 The Sinister Library of Niltrias

The layout of the Library is as follows:

```
         #########################################        #######
         #..............................##......"#      ###.....###
         #..............................##.##....#     ##...#.#...##
      ####.................................##....# #####...........#####
      #.................................#####".."# #"....#."...".#...."#
      #.##..............................#   ###### #####...........#####
#######.##.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#..#          #"....#."...".#...."#
#...G##.##..............................#          #####...........#####
#.<.....###.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#          #"....#."...".#...."#
#....#### #.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#          #####...........#####
###.##    #"#"#"#"#"#"#"#"#"#"#"#"#"#"#"#          #"....#."...".#...."#
  #.#     ###############################          #####...........#####
  #.####################################################..."..."...#
  #........................................................#...#...#
  #################################################1#####.........##
   #.."##"......"##"......"##"............##"."####.#   ##.......##
   #]...1...##".......##"......"##"."##"............#    #########
   ##################################################
```
* The numeral 1 represents secret doors.
* The ghost librarian 'G' is nonhostile (see the section below).

There is a certain amount of variation in the items found in the Library; this map was 
generated with a wizard PC. The items in the eastern chamber and the large main room will 
be scrolls rather than spellbooks for non-spellcasters. This is a good thing, since scrolls 
are useful for all classes, while non-spellcasters are often unable to read spellbooks 
efficiently or at all. Note the ] in the southwest corner. It is a climbing set, which is 
required to get back into the Rift dungeon. Equipment may be destroyed while in the 
Library, so it is prudent to leave the climbing set where it is until the PC is finished 
with the rest of the Library. There will be monster guardians found on top of every 
spellbook or scroll. These monsters can be anything and are uniformly dangerous. On a 
recent trip through the Library, a master lich, ancient dragons, a quickling lord, a frost 
giant jarl, a stone giant lord, a moloch and a mimic hivemind were found among others. It 
is wise to bring dragon slaying ammo in case an ancient karmic dragon is generated. 
Likewise, demon slaying ammo or phase daggers are very nice to have in case a (greater) 
moloch is generated.

Wizards who visit the Library will find every spellbook available in the game, including 
Wish. Necromancers, for instance, will not. Necromancers find scrolls in the two large 
rooms and spellbooks in the small northeast room and the hidden passageway. The exact 
details of what class finds Spellbooks vs scrolls is being investigated. Spellbooks can be 
destroyed while in the Library (by blue dragons, for example), so be careful with rare 
spellbooks.

### 2.22.2.1 The Ghost Librarian

The Ghost Librarian is nonhostile and plays no role in the game under most circumstances. 
However, he can be the source of an important artifact, the Weird Tome. In order to obtain 
the Weird Tome the PC must have Stealth at 100 and spend at least 2000 turns in the Library 
without 'C'hatting to monsters. Currently, wizards, for instance, can cast spells 
throughout their combat in the Library and, after vanquishing the monsters, read some 
spellbooks to pass time before 'C'hatting to the Ghost Librarian. At that point the Ghost 
Librarian will reward the PC with the Weird Tome, which can be exchanged for five cursed 
scrolls of chaos resistance courtesy of the Mad Minstrel. It is impossible to read the 
weird tome. The message generated is: "This book is filled with strange texts written in 
weird letters. You have difficulties concentrating on the text. After a while you manage to 
focus your sight on the text. The text contains a strange collection of tunes, songs and 
instrumental pieces. It seems to be some kind of code, hinting at some ancient powerful 
magic, a scroll or something like that... You fail to decipher it." High level wizards, for 
instance, who attempt to read the Weird Tome are Confused for a considerable length of time. 
Do not try it in a potentially dangerous location!

