# 2.26 The Unicorn Quests

Guth'Alak, the druid in Terinyo, will reveal the location of the Greater White Unicorn's 
glade once the PC reaches experience level 30, regardless of the PC's alignment. He asks 
the PC to search a beautiful park in the central forest for a good and noble creature in 
need of help. Upon returning to the central forest, the glade appears as a green asterisk 
near the Old Barbarian's clearing. It is described as "A beautiful park." prior to 
entering.

## 2.26.1 Yrruir, the Greater White Unicorn

After entering the glade, Yrruir can be found teleporting around randomly. Despite the fact 
that Guth'Alak reveals this location regardless of alignment, Yrruir generally attacks PCs 
with chaotic alignment on sight. There have been rare and scattered reports of chaotic PCs 
who were not attacked. When 'C'hatted with, Yrruir explains that the forces of Chaos have 
stolen a part of his life essence and forged it into his evil counterpart, manifested as a 
Greater Black Unicorn. Yrruir asks the PC to kill his counterpart in order to regain the 
stolen life essence and restore his full powers. If the PC is successful, Yrruir rewards 
the PC with an offer to cleanse all corruption *once* and only once. A player who completes 
this quest has to carefully decide when to take advantage of Yrruir's offer. If the PC is 
badly corrupted prior to entering the lowest parts of the CoC, it will probably be 
necessary to have all corruption removed before the endgame. However, it is best to have 
Yrruir remove all corruption as the last thing the PC does before leaving the Drakalor 
Chain, if the player is concerned with receiving the highest possible score and happiest 
future history after finishing.

## 2.26.2 Riurry, the Greater Black Unicorn

Riurry can be found in a corrupted glade just east of Yrruir's glade. As an evil chaotic 
being, he of course offers rewards if the PC kills Yrruir when 'C'hatted with. If the PC 
then returns to Yrruir, he is warned not to listen to Riurry's evil babbling. Killing 
Yrruir at this point will result in a significant alignment drop, of course, but causes no 
other noticeable effects. The PC does not lose the Lucky or Fate Smiles intrinsics, nor 
does he gain the Cursed or Doomed intrinsics. Returning to Riurry and 'C'hatting results in 
being rewarded with 1-2 corruptions, a blessed amulet of chaos and 5-7 uncursed potions of 
gain attributes. The player has to decide which path to take. The potions of gain 
attributes are a significant reward. If the player is going for an ultimate chaos god 
ending, it seems logical to accept Riurry's quest. Other PCs may choose this quest if 
corruption is either not a problem or desired for chaos gate entry. The alignment drop may 
also be useful for becoming chaotic around experience level 30 in order to receive 
Gaab'Baay's quests, for those PCs attempting an ultra ending.


