# 2.27 The Bug-Infested Temple

100 PC deaths must be recorded in the adom.cnt file before entry will be allowed.  
There are no experience or level requirements for entry, either for the PC or 
in the HISCORE file.

Some of the walls in the bug temple are diggable, but so many are not that it is not 
possible to make real progress.

The bug temple has been beefed up considerably with the simple addition of the 
see invisible intrinsic for the bugs. Low (or even high) level spellcasters are 
no longer going to be able to finish this area easily.

The rewards have been toned down: only three SoCRs, six PoUH, eight SoMM. The 
wand of fireballs has ten charges, the wand of teleportation has six charges. 

The bug-infested temple consists of two parts: the bug wilderness (BUGWIL) and bug cave 
(BUGCAV). The wilderness part's outer limits are scattered with greater claw bugs, that 
low-level spellcasters can bolt to death (be very cautious!). Around the down staircase, 
there are eight killer bugs.

Note that both greater claw bugs and killer bugs have high speed, breed, have multiple 
attacks and bypass the PC's PV. This means that they are what they're called - killers - 
in melee.

Eating a greater claw bug corpse increases speed, gives +3 Dx and -6 Wi. Eating a killer 
bug corpse also increases speed, gives +6 Dx and -12 Wi.

The layout of BUGCAV:

```
   ##########################                            ############
   #........................#                            #....iiiiii#
   #.######################.##############################.###iiiiii#
   #.#################    #.............1.....1............# #iiiiii#
   #.#iiiiii#........#    #############.#####1###########1## #iiiiii#
   #.#iiiiii..######.#####     ###### #.# #iiiii#      #ggg# ########
   #.#iiiiii####ggggggggg#     #iiii###.# #iiiii#     ##ggg##
   #.###########g.......g####  #iiii....# #iiiii#######iiiii#######
   #....1.......g...<...g...#  #iiii##### #######].]##iiiiiii##].]#
   ######.######g.......g##.#########           ##.##iiiiiiiii##.##
        #.#    #ggggggggg##...#               ####...............####
    #####.#    #####.########.#               #]#####i..i.i..i#####]##
    #iiiii#  #######...#    #.########        #..........]..........]#
    #iiiii#  #iiiii###.#    #...iiiii#        #]#####i..i.i..i#####]##
    #iiiii#  #iiiii....#    ####iiiii#        ####.......i.......####
    #iiiii#  #iiiii#####       #iiiii#          ##.##i..ggg..i##.##
    #######  #iiiii#           #iiiii#          #].]#####]#####].]#
             #######           #######          #####   ###   #####
```

The 'g's are greater claw bugs and 'i's are killer bugs. ]'s represent named marble statues. 
The numeral 1 represents secret doors. Teleportation doesn't work in BUGCAV.  All the 
marble statues can be picked up and broken, like normal ones. However, there's another 
meaning to them; reading. They're in place to honor the prerelease testing group of version 
1.0.0. Here's a compilation of what they all mean and what you get from them. The format for 
the list is: real name of tester - statue text - reward for breaking the statue, besides 
rocks

* Thomas Biskup - "Bassuk Thimosp, Human wizard, who slaughtered the fearful experience drainer of Prr'rlse." - nothing
* Stephen Mackey (Karkadinn) - "Matsep Cheyken, Troll Assassin, who dedicated his life to harvesting the fish of Vinooresen." - barbed trident of hunting (+2, 3d5+5)
* Markku Rikola - "Molkar Ur-Yack, the Orcish Elementalist, who unraveled the secret of the legendary Ball of Hellfire, unfortunately slaughtering himself in the process." - wand of fireballs (10 charges)
* Olli "Shader" Juhala - "Da Sehr Jhuala Liol, Dark Elven Beastfighter. He was unexepctedly engulfed by the primal chaos of sorcerer coined." - 3 * scroll of chaos resistance
* Adrian Bancilhon - "Raidan Nichloban, Gray Elven Barbarian. Slow of tongue, Slow of speech, The healing arts, He helped to teach." - 6 * potion of ultra healing
* Andy Williams - "Malawi Syldin, Dark Elven Ranger, who opened the lost door of Mixyip Tor." - wand of door creation (100 charges)
* John Rowat - "Wor Janoth, Hurthling Mindcrafter. Explorer of the Lost Volcano." - 8 * scroll of magic mapping
* Julian Day - "Yali Na Jud, Dark Elven Merchant, who collected the orbs before being crushed by a thousand tons of rock." - padded elven chain mail of resilience [+0, +9]
* Paul Nimmo - "Apul Omnim, the Male Human paladin. Finder of the sightless path." - vigilant adamantion plate mail of travelling (-2, -4) [-2, +11]
* Teemu Kokki - "Tuok Mekkei, Dwarven Ranger, who took part in the expedition where the mysterious experience drainer was first discovered." - 12 * winged quarrel of slaying
* Olivier Benard - "Dervi Albeiron, Human Paladin. He joined the forces of Law against the foul beasts of G'ubs." - lawful 2HS of devastation (+3, 5d10+8) [-1, +0]
* Aaron Dutton - "Anora Tnod't, Troll Paladine. Lurker who was last to observe a dungeon collapse caused by a writhing mass of primal chaos." - holy heavy club of devastation (+3, 5d10+8) [-1, +0]
* Conrad Brekke - "Candor Kerbek the Trap Eater. Dark Elf Assassin. Who devised the devious deathmaze of the Assassin's Guild." - wand of teleportation (6 charges)
* Joni Toivanen - "Janoi Netovi, the Human Barbarian, who was seriously ill while others slaughtered gubs." - 12 * crystal of health

Note that some of the rewards' stats may vary and that they are all *cursed*. However, those 
potions of ultra healing, scrolls of magic mapping and especially the scrolls of chaos 
resistance are a gift that makes visiting the Bug Cave very worthwhile.

There is one more statue, an "unfinished statue of an unquestionably famous hero" in honor 
of Raymond Martineau. No reward for breaking him down, though.

Breaking all the statues stops the breeding of the bugs and results in an appropriate line 
in the accomplishment list at the end of the game.

