# 2.5 Dwarftown

Dwarftown is an important milestone in the game. It is a source of numerous helpful NPCs 
and locations, including a shop, a smithy, a coaligned altar (for non-chaotics) and a 
training hall where stats may be increased. Of equal importance is the fact that it is a 
resting place. After the descent through the upper CoC, the PC can rest here without 
constantly being assaulted by monsters. There is nothing hostile in Dwarftown initially, 
with the exception of an almost-guaranteed mimic in Waldenbrook's shop (note the empty 
space in the shop in the map below - it is a mimic).

A map of Dwarftown:

```
      #######################################################################
      #.....................................................................#
    ###########......................##########.............................###
    #..#(*?[((#.Waldenbrook's........#........#..........#######..............#
  ###..#!("[."#....shop......#####...#.Garth's#..........#.....#..............###
  #....#%[?/*]#..............#..!#.../Training#..........#...../.Glod's.........#
 ##....#%!%%['#..............#...#...#..Hall..#..........#..&..#.smithy.........#
 #.....#%!%\\*#..............#...#...#........#..........#.....#................#
 #.....##/#####..............###/#...##########..........#.....#................#
 #.......................Thrundarr's.....................#######................#
 #...<......................room.............................................>..#
 #..............................................................................#
 #........###/###.......####........................######/##...................#
 ##.Altar.#.....#.......#..#.Dwarven................#.......#...................#
  #..room.#.....#.......#..#.Mystic's...............#.Green.#...................#
  ###.....#.._..#.......####..Room..................#Griffon#.................###
    #.....#.....#...........................>.......#..Inn..#.................#
    ###...#######....................Stairway.to....#########...............###
      #...............................Ogre.cave.............................#
      #######################################################################
```

## 2.5.1 Waldenbrook

Waldenbrook is the shopkeeper in Dwarftown.  His is a general store type of shop selling 
and buying a variety of goods.  He occasionally stocks an item or two of high quality, 
sometimes even an artifact.  His prices are generally reasonable.  Bear in mind, however, 
that he has the same racial prejudices as all other shopkeepers (see section 0.13.7).

## 2.5.2 Ruun

Ruun, the Priest in Dwarftown is always generated with the same race as the PC.  He 
presides over a small room containing an altar, which will be coaligned unless the PC is 
chaotic.  If a coaligned PC is carrying unidentified potions, it is worth 'C'hatting with 
him.  He will identify potions that have a healing effect: potions of (extra/ultra) 
healing and potions of cure poison.  If a PC whose alignment does not match the altar's 
'C'hats with him he responds with "Ye oughta convert.  Then we'll talk."

Note that converting the altar in Dwarftown (perhaps even attempting to convert it) will 
cause Ruun to become hostile, which in turn causes the entire town to become hostile.  
Luring him out of Dwarftown, killing him and then returning will not work either, as his 
shade returns to inform the dwarves of what has happened, resulting in the same scenario.  
Unless your PC knows exactly what he is doing and why he is doing it, angering or attacking 
Ruun is highly inadvisable.  See also section 2.5.8 below about the Demented Ratling 
and causing commotion in Dwarftown.

## 2.5.3 Thrundarr

Thrundarr is the village elder. He can provide background information on a variety of 
subjects, none of which is really crucial to completing the game. He assigns six lawful 
quests regardless of alignment. They are listed in the next section.

### 2.5.3.1 Thrundarr's quests, their rewards and the significance of the rewards

Several quests are available from Thrundarr once the PC achieves experience level six.  
Talking to Thrundarr about 'quest' provides access to them:

The first five quests are available in this order:


1. Slay a random creature.  This can be a very annoying quest.  Thrundarr can assign anything ranging from a goblin to a Ghost Lord.  The reward is having the PC's entire inventory identified or the (artifact) potion of literacy for illiterate characters.
2. Find out what is beyond the animated forest.  The PC has two choices here: traverse the animated forest or bypass it and descend through the Dwarven Halls.  See section 2.5.3.1.1 below about these locations.  The reward for this quest is a blessed wand of fireballs with twelve charges.  This comes in very handy in the Pyramid (see section 2.9).
  * WARNING: Be very careful when wandering around below Dwarftown before receiving this quest. Entering the Animated Forest for even a single turn before the quest is assigned results in Thrundarr refusing to assign it, instead assigning another random monster quest with *no reward*.  Since the wand of fireballs (blessed with twelve charges, no less) can be very useful, entering the Animated Forest before the quest is assigned is very unwise.  Note that this does not occur if the PC enters the Dwarven Halls.
3. Kill the ogre tribe below Dwarftown - the staircase to this level is generated between the Dwarven Mystic's room and the Green Griffon Inn.  See section 2.5.3.1.2 below about this quest.  The reward is 5000 gold pieces, useful for training with Garth (see section 2.5.5).
4. Become the Champion of the Arena - if the PC is already the Champion of the Arena, another random monster quest is assigned - a very good reason *not* to become the Champion until this quest is assigned.  Instead of a cash reward, the PC is given an artifact sword, the Golden Gladius, for winning the 20th Arena fight.  Thrundarr's rewards for this quest are usually pieces of equipment which vary according to the class of the PC and possibly the RNG.  A couple of examples:

```
       A mindcrafter (probably) received:

       blessed mithril cap [+0, +2]                         [40s]
       blessed adamantium chain mail (-1, -3) [-1, +8]     [288s]
       blessed mithril girdle [+0, +2]                      [20s]
       blessed adamantium long sword (+0, 1d8+5)            [28s]
       blessed medium mithril shield [+5, +1]               [80s]
       blessed ring of fire resistance                       [1s]
       blessed adamantium boots [+0, +3]                    [89s]

       A wizard and a beastfighter both received:

       heap of 8 blessed bandages                           [16s]
       blessed waterproof blanket                           [10s]
       blessed fireproof blanket                            [10s]
       blessed ring of fire resistance                       [1s]
       heap of 5 uncursed potions of extra healing          [10s]
       uncursed potion of gain attributes                    [4s]
       uncursed potion of ultra healing                      [2s]
       blessed scroll of familiar summoning                  [2s]
```
  * The bandages, blankets, etc. seem to be the most common set of equipment received as a reward for this quest.
  * These are nice enough, but of no great consequence in the context of the whole game. Of greater importance is the fact that the PC now has the Golden Gladius.  It can be exchanged for training with Bart the grizzled gladiator.  See section 2.5.7.1 below.
  * It is also possible under some circumstances to receive the artifact dwarven shield "Rolf's Saviour" as a reward for this quest.  Lawful alignment is probably a requirement alomg with cooperation from the RNG.
5. Slay a greater daemon that has been terrorizing Dwarftown.  The daemon can be a difficult opponent, particularly if it becomes entangled with the dwarves in the city. Bear in mind the fact that the greater daemon can kill NPCs who may be helpful later. This includes the demented ratling, which destroys the possibility of any special ending. The greater daemon breathes fire and is a stat drainer.  It can be sacrificed on the altar in Dwarftown.  If the PC is lucky enough to have found demon slaying ammo, use it!  There will be more found later.  The reward for this quest is the artifact mace Big Punch, which many PCs find useless because it is so heavy - 800 stones.  It is potential sacrificial fodder.

Thrundarr's sixth quest, available at any time and often taken out of order by many players, is to free the spirit of Griff Bloodax, a dwarven hero who has been turned into an undead dwarven chaos berserker by the master necromancer Nonnak. It is necessary to ask him about 'portal' to obtain this quest. In return for completing this quest, Thrundarr provides some equipment rewards (see section 2.7) and more importantly opens the dwarven portal leading to the deeper CoC. Note that it is not strictly necessary to do this quest. Thrundarr stands on a lever that controls the portal. If he is removed from that location, the PC can 'h'andle the lever himself. Methods for accomplishing this include teleporting Thrundarr, confusing him and killing him.

Thrundarr is teleportation resistant, thus using charges from a wand of teleportation is not recommended unless there is no alternative. A PC with the Teleportation spell has no problem. Teleporting him causes no alignment drop; Thrundarr does not become hostile and he will still assign quests. Killing him is a rather drastic act with all sorts of negative consequences. Using ventriloquism on him is fairly easy, confuses him and causes him to wander off the lever. It causes an alignment drop roughly equivalent to killing him but does not curse or doom the PC nor are muscular dwarves summoned. It does make Thrundarr hostile after he recovers from his confusion. This causes an amusing scenario as the non-hostile dwarves encounter a hostile Thrundarr wandering around Dwarftown chasing the PC.

The PC should actually do the quest unless there is a very specific reason not to do so, since there are very useful artifacts generated during the quest. See section 2.7 for more about this quest.

#### 2.5.3.1.1 The animated forest and the Dwarven Halls

Thrundarr asks the PC to pass through the Animated Forest and find out what lies beyond. 
He also mentions a possibly dangerous shortcut which turn out to be the Dwarven Halls 
DH: 1 and DH: 2. On approximately D: 15 there will be a level that has two down 
staircases. One leads to the Animated Forest, the other to the Dwarven Halls. It is 
impossible to tell them apart. 

Passing through the Animated Forest is a test of one's patience among other things. The 
entire level is filled with living trees milling about. The majority are not hostile but 
will of course become hostile if attacked. It is difficult to get through them without 
accidentally hitting one or more. When the PC encounters hostile trees it is best not to 
try to fight them but rather keep moving. In fact it is usually best to be as defensive as 
possible and forget about offense completely: wield two shields and use Coward tactics. 
The hostile trees will usually be left behind in the crowd. It seems to be best to keep 
moving in any case and refrain from resting on one square. Invisibility is a tremendous 
asset in the Animated Forest, but PCs usually do not have it available at this stage of 
the game. One thing to avoid entirely is any kind of fire magic in the forest. The whole 
forest becomes hostile.

The alternative to the tedium of the Animated Forest is a descent through the Dwarven 
Halls. This is much faster but potentially dangerous. Very out-of-depth monsters can be 
generated in the Dwarven Halls. If the PC has invisibility, seven league boots or anything 
that increases speed, wear them before entering in case it becomes necessary to flee. 
Exploring other than finding the down stairways is highly inadvisable.

Both of these locations can be problematic. The Animated Forest is always incredibly 
tedious. The Dwarven Halls can be a cakewalk if the PC is lucky enough to have the 
stairways generated close together. They can also be a virtual instadeath if a very nasty 
monster shows up. As Thrundarr says, "It's yer choice."


2.5.3.1.2 The Ogre Cave

There is an ogre tribe below Dwarftown which Thrundarr asks the PC to eliminate. This 
quest is relatively easy compared to getting through the Animated Forest or Dwarven Halls. 
The ordinary ogres have no special attacks and the PC should be able to bash them with 
brute force combined with missile attacks or blast them with magic. Weaker races might 
find a corpse or two that grants a strength increase. A potential problem is the ogre magi 
present on the level. They are capable of becoming invisible and casting Frost Bolt. PCs 
who have no cold resistance need to watch out for them. Wear an amulet of the cold heart 
if the PC has one. There are also a couple of ogre lords present, which are tougher than 
the ordinary ogres.


2.5.4 The Dwarven Mystic

The Dwarven Mystic is found in a 2 x 2 sealed room east of the room containing the altar. 
The most common way to get in is by teleporting. The Dwarven Mystic used to be a 
guaranteed source of the artifact dwarven rune axe Rolf's Companion for non-chaotics. In 
g16p2 he may give lawfuls the axe. Neutrals never receive the axe but rather some 
equipment which varies. It can be four scrolls of chaos resistance and/or seven blessed 
potions of insight, potions of extra healing or other equipment. Several gammas ago, 
Rolf's Companion was a very powerful artifact. In recent gammas, it has been weakened to 
the point that many players regard the possibility of getting four scrolls of chaos 
resistance from the Dwarven Mystic as an argument for neutral alignment at this point in 
the game. Chaotics will receive nothing from him. He responds with the message "It wasn't 
you I've been waiting for!"

Note that teleportation traps may be conveniently generated adjacent to and within the 
dwarven mystic's room. However, this is only possible if Dwarftown is generated on D: 11.:

  .....^
  .####.
  .#.^#.
  .#^.#.
  .####.
  ^.....

The carets represent locations where a teleportation trap may be created.

It is also possible to open the walls of the Dwarven Mystic's room with a wand of 
destruction. This is somewhat dangerous, since nearby townspeople, and perhaps the 
Dwarven Mystic himself, may be damaged by the blast, causing some, or all, inhabitants of 
Dwarftown to become hostile. If the player is careful, it is possible to destroy the 
walls, 'C'hat with the Dwarven Mystic and receive his rewards in the usual manner.

If a PC with non-chaotic alignment has committed a crime in Dwarftown which results in an 
alarm gong being rung and muscular dwarves being summoned, the Dwarven Mystic responds 
with a different message "Ye art doomed!" This does not result in the PC gaining the 
cursed or doomed intrinsics. A wished-for Dwarven Mystic also always responds with this 
message.


2.5.5 Garth and Training

Garth is the dwarven weaponmaster found in the training hall east of Thrundarr's room. 
Garth will train all stats except Appearance and Mana. The formula for how much to pay 
is $100 * stat value, doubled once for each 5 points over 15. Here are examples of what 
to pay Garth: 

Stat score    Payment

   1-15          100 -   1500gp (100x)
  16-20         3200 -   4000gp (200x)
  21-25         8400 -  10000gp (400x)
  26-30        20800 -  24000gp (800x)
  31-35        49600 -  56000gp (1600x)
  36-40       115200 - 128000gp (3200x)
  41-45       262400 - 288000gp (6400x)
  46-50       588800 - 640000gp (12800x)

Note that the effects of training do not happen instantaneously. The stat has simply been 
trained. The game checks every so often (and always when gaining an experience level) to 
see if a stat is eligible for an increase. This is when the stat will rise. Note also that 
it is possible to pay Garth once and receive several stat increases as a result. This is 
particularly useful for those PC's with a very low stat score in one or more categories. 
Paying Garth well in excess of the amount needed to raise the stat will result in multiple 
stat increases over time.

Note that there is a manual entry under the Attributes section that states the following:

"The potential maximum attribute scores are based on the initial attribute scores. The 
maximum for an attribute is dependent on the base score and the player race. These 
maximums can only rarely be surpassed by natural training. This is a long and arduous 
process. Only magical methods can exceed these limits with ease."

This seems to imply that Garth cannot train a stat beyond its natural maximum. This may 
be true under "reasonable" circumstances. Giving Garth massive amounts of gold may be a 
different story.


2.5.6 Glod and Smithing

Glod, the dwarven smith in Dwarftown, will teach the Smithing skill.  There is a price for 
this which seems to depend on Charisma,  Appearance or both.  The base price seems to vary 
from as low as 800 to as high as 20000 gold pieces, and seems to be heavily influenced by 
race.

Glod is also capable of removing rust from rusted items and fixing certain broken items, 
notably pickaxes, again, for a price.  It has been reported that after removing rust from 
an item a number of times, Glod will offer to rustproof the item.

After learning the Smithing skill, Glod will make his equipment available to the PC for 
a price, typically 2500 gold pieces.

It is possible to teleport Glod away from his smithy, although the details (wand of 
teleportation vs the Teleportation spell) have yet to be worked out. He wanders in 
Dwarftown but still asks for the nominal 2500 gold piece fee (seemingly telepathically, 
probably a bug) after this. However, at this point, he can be lured off the level if he 
is adjacent to a staircase, like any other inhabitant of Dwarftown. After Glod is left 
on another level, his demands for payment cease. Note that this may involve considerable 
tedium as the PC attempts to lure Glod off the level.

It is possible to kill Glod without making the rest of Dwarftown hostile, thus making 
his smithy available for free. One method of doing this involves using the greater daemon 
generated by Thrundarr's fifth quest. If the greater daemon is lured near Glod, it will 
kill Glod.


2.5.7 The Green Griffon Inn

The Green Griffon Inn holds two useful NPCs described below. It is located in the 
southeast corner of Dwarftown.


2.5.7.1 Bart

Bart provides teaching in three skills: Backstabbing, Tactics and Two Weapon Combat in 
exchange for the Golden Gladius, the artifact sword provided as a reward for winning 
the 20th Arena fight. Tactics is available only from him. He also provides some training 
in weapon skills, raising all zero level skills to level one and providing small bonuses 
to other weapon skils. The number of weapon marks that he gives seems to be (learning 
score)d10. The training in weapon skills is secondary as compared to granting the Tactics 
skill, which is of much greater importance in the game.


2.5.7.2 Torgall

Torgall is the innkeeper in the Green Griffon Inn. He is a source of rumors, for the price 
of an ale.


2.5.8 The Demented Ratling

The Demented Ratling is an important NPC for all PCs trying for a special ending. He 
demands to be fed six artifacts in exchange for revealing the secret of the Stone Circle, 
where the Crown of Chaos can be found. He will only talk to chaotic PCs. He becomes much 
more powerful each time he is fed an artifact. This is important to remember. If the PC 
is going to cause commotion in Dwarftown, for example in order to fulfill Kherab's second 
quest, it should only be done after feeding a number of artifacts to the demented ratling. 
Otherwise the demented ratling may be killed in the ensuing battle for control of 
Dwarftown.

A wished-for demented ratling will make the usual demand for six artifacts from a chaotic 
PC, but will not eat an artifact.  Instead, he responds with "Ya naw will neeta die!"  He 
is not necessarily hostile after this.

It is possible to anger the demented ratling to the point where he will attack by 
repeatedly (about five times) talking to him after giving him artifacts.
