# 2.9 The Pyramid

The pyramid is located in the wilderness, slightly east of the exact center of the map. 
It can be entered once the PC reaches experience level 13. When this happens, the game 
generates a message: "You suddenly feel ancient magical energies manifest in your 
vicinity." Searching the current location will reveal the papyrus scroll, which is an 
invitation to enter the pyramid. It is not necessary to read, or even find, the scroll 
for admission to the pyramid. It asks the PC to come as soon as possible. Do not be 
fooled by this. It is best to wait as long as possible before entering the pyramid, since 
it is a rather nasty place. The entrance to the pyramid closes permanently if the PC 
reaches experience level 17. Ideally the PC should reach experience level 16 and keep 
very careful track of his experience points. Approach the pyramid when the PC is close to 
achieving level 17, within a couple hundred points. Wander around in the vicinity of the 
pyramid to generate wilderness encounters. Killing monsters in the wilderness should 
enable the player to fine-tune his experience score to the point where very few additional 
points are needed to achieve level 17. Then enter the pyramid. The first couple of kills 
in the pyramid will raise the PC to experience level 17, maximizing the chances of success 
in the pyramid. Keep a *very* close eye on those experience points. You don't want to 
accidentally achieve level 17 and have the pyramid close, because Rehetep carries two 
artifacts.

## 2.9.1 The first two levels

The first level of the pyramid has the following layout:

```
 ###########                              #######
 #.........#      ############            #.....#             #######
 #.##.<.##.#      #^^1.......#    #########.....#             #.....#
##.##...##.########^####.###.#### #.........#...###################.#
#..........^^^^^111^####.#......# #.###.#########................##.#
###################^^11..######.# #.# #.#########.####.#####.######.##
#^#^#^#^#^#^#^#^# ###1#########.# #.# #........^..#  #.### #..^......#
#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#   #.##........# #.# ###########.#  #...# #.###.#####
#.#.#.#.#.#.#.#.### #.##.###.#### #.#####    ####.############ #.#######
#...............1.###.##.# #....# #....^#    #........# #.#    #..^..1.#
#########^#######.....##.# ####.#########    #.##########.#    #.###.#(#
#.....# #.......#.######.####.^...# ######## #.#######.##.##########.#.#
##.##.# ####.####.########.##.###.###......# #......##.....^.1.....1.1.#
 #.##.######.####....#.....##.# #.....####.###.####.##.#############.###
 #.#......##.#....##.##.##....# #.....#  #.....#  #.##.###     #.....#
 #.###.##.####.##.#####.####### #..>..######1###  #......#     #.#####
 ### #.##......#....^...#       #.....1......#    ########     #.#
     ####################       ##############                 ###
```

The numeral 1 is used to indicate the presence of a secret door. Note the traps. These are 
guaranteed traps. There will also be a number of non-guaranteed traps present. The 
location of the non-guaranteed traps changes from game to game. Also note the tools 
represented by the ( symbol. This cache of tools is guaranteed and includes thieves' 
picks, a climbing set and a pickaxe. The tools are always located on top of a trap.
The inhabitants of this level include (greater) mummies, ghosts, spectres, jackal demons, 
jackalweres, jackals and hyenas. Mummies can cause sickness. It is very unwise to enter 
the pyramid without some means of dealing with sickness. The fastest and easiest way to 
cure sickness is with blessed or uncursed curaria mancox herbs.

The second level of the pyramid has the following layout:

```
   ###         ###### #######
   #.###########....# #^^^^^#
   #....^.....##.######1###^#####
  ####.######....#.....^.##^#...#
  #....# ####.####.####.###^1.<.#
  ##^### #....^.....# #.# ###...#
 ###.# ###.########.#############
 #.#####........# #....##....#
 #.##....>.###.####.#####.#####
##.##.##...# #.#...........##.#
#.....########.#.##.###^#####.#
#####.....##.#.#.######.......#
  #...###.##.######.....###.###
  ##### #.....#   #.##### #.#
        #######   ###     ###
```

Again the numeral 1 indicates secret doors. This level is very similar to the first level 
in terms of monsters and traps. There is no guaranteed equipment here.

## 2.9.2 The top level

The top level of the pyramid has the following layout:

```
      #######
     ##..Z..##
    ##.......##
#####&.......&#####
#Z@.............@Z#
#.#.............#.#
#Z@.............@Z#
#.#.............#.#
#Z@.............@Z#
#.#.............#.#
#Z@.............@Z#
#.#.............#.#
#@...............@#
##...............##
 ###.....>.....###
   ###.......###
     #########
```

There is a unique feature on this level. The down staircase, represented by the > symbol, 
changes location randomly once when the PC enters the level. This forces the PC to fight 
his way to the new location if a retreat is necessary. Furthermore, the monsters on the 
level will not follow the PC down the stairs. In older gammas of ADOM, it was possible to 
lure the monsters down the stairs one at a time and dispatch them. It doesn't work in 
current versions of the game.

The Z at the top represents Rehetep, the Mummy Lord. The remaining Zs are mummies. The & 
characters are jackal demons, which have a confusion attatck. The @ characters represent 
a random monster, generally somewhat out of depth, but not terribly so. Bear in mind that 
mummies see invisible. If the PC is fortunate enough to have a means of invisibility at 
this point, use it and take out the mummies first.

### 2.9.2.1 Rehetep

Rehetep the Mummy Lord holds two powerful artifacts, the Ankh and the Ancient Mummy 
Wrapping. A Greater Identify of each is below:

-----------------
blessed ancient mummy wrapping [+1, +5] {Ap-8}
---------------

It is an artifact.

When worn it modifies DV by +1 and PV by +5.
When used in melee combat it grants a +0 bonus to hit and causes 1d1 points of
damage. When used as a missile it grants a +0 bonus to hit and causes 1d1
points of damage.

It modifies your appearance attribute by -8.
It grants resistance to sleep attacks.
It grants resistance to stunning.
It grants resistance to death attacks.
It grants the ability to see invisible things.
It grants IMMUNITY to cold attacks.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

---------------------------------
uncursed ankh
--------------------------------

It is an artifact.

When worn it modifies DV by +2 and PV by +2.
When used in melee combat it grants a -4 bonus to hit and causes 1d3 points of
damage. When used as a missile it grants a -4 bonus to hit and causes 1d3
points of damage.

It increases your luck.
It grants luck.
It makes Fate smile upon you.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note that the [+2, +2] nature of the Ankh is not revealed explicitly except when Greater 
Identified. Note also that it not only grants the Lucky and Fate smiles intrinsics, but 
also increases luck, a hidden property used by the game when calculating dice rolls, etc.

The artifact Ancient Mummy Wrapping is the only mummy wrapping that weighs 60 stones. Be 
sure not to confuse it with other mummy wrappings. They are all described as a "strange 
wrapping" prior to identification. The resistances granted by the Ancient Mummy Wrapping 
are considerable and should give clues about how to attack Rehetep. Using cold based 
attacks is, of course, useless. Rehetep and other mummies are vulnerable to fire. This is 
where the wand of fireballs available from Thrundarr as a quest reward comes in very 
handy. Do not give up when messages about Rehetep "shrugging off" fire based attacks are 
generated. He will succumb to repeated fire attacks. All mummies including Rehetep are 
vulnerable to undead slaying ammo, of course.

Note that the combination of cold immunity and the see invisible intrinsic available from 
the Ancient Mummy Wrapping makes Li-Hon-Kay, a potential 20th Arena fight opponent, much 
easier to defeat.
