1.1 What kind of character is good for each starsign?


A) Raven

The +10 to speed is good for all PCs. It can save the life of low level PCs who need to 
run away from a monster they can't handle. The "messengers will reach you faster" refers 
to the delivery of the rune-covered trident, which happens faster for those born in this 
month, a nice bonus. The "harder to trick by deceptions" grants resistance to confusion 
attacks by dopplegangers. The stronger companions characteristic makes this month 
excellent for bards.

B) Book 

Lawful tendencies is a weak effect. One free skill increase each level helps all PCs, 
especially those with low learning. Increased chance to learn spells means borderline 
cases have a better chance. This is not the ideal month for a wizard - they are already 
great at learning spells. More suited to elven fighting classes or a dwarvish paladin. 

C) Wand 

Here we have the sign for a neutral wizard. Gray elven wizards are ideal with their 
naturally high mana and neutral alignment. They are somewhat difficult to keep alive in 
the early game but become enormously powerful in the mid- and endgame.

D) Unicorn 

Generic sign with resistance to corruption. Pretty attractive for any PC going for an 
ultra ending, especially an aspiring Avatar of Order. The fact that lawful alignment is 
difficult to change means such a PC can commit a few chaotic acts and get away with it 
without becoming a fallen champion. Also nice for an aspiring (ultimate) chaos god, 
since crowned chaotics are corrupted more rapidly than others.

E) Salamander 

Very attractive for elementalists, who rely on a lot of fire magic. Not half bad for a 
necromancer who finds some fire-based spellbooks, either. Necromancers need that +3 to 
Mana.

F) Dragon 

Fighters. The +1 to toughness is not significant - that is within the variability for 
the stat for identical race/class PCs. The -3 to willpower is significant and makes 
this unattractive for those who need it in the early game - wizards, mindcrafters. Not 
a bad month for paladins with both weapon and combat magic costs reduced.

G) Sword 

Learning bonus is insignificant, although it can push a PC from illiterate to literate. 
The 20% reduction in cost to train melee weapon skills makes this attractive for a PC 
that really wants to become super-proficient with a weapon. Not a bad choice for rangers 
who start the game dual wielding swords.

H) Falcon 

Grants the survival skill to any character. This skill is generally considered as being 
of little use (see section 0.4). The willpower bonus is somewhat useful for spellcasters 
and mindcrafters, although better starsigns exist for those classes. The charisma bonus 
is of little significance for any character, with the possible exception of bards, 
necromancers and male merchants. The free talent is good for all PCs, especially for 
gnomish and hurthling bards, as it guarantees them both a very useful heir gift and the 
possibility to go for the treasure hunter talent.

I) Cup 

Another sign for wizards. Higher learning to start and the 10% reduction to gain a level 
means they advance rapidly, which is very helpful in keeping them alive at low level. The 
20% effectivity increase in learning spells also helps keep them alive in the early game, 
while the player has not had time to raise their learning score.

J) Candle 

This can be an unbelievable sign for trolls. They heal rapidly anyway, but those born in 
this month almost don't need the Healing skill! Almost. Get it and they seem to have 
natural regeneration. Playing a trollish healer born in this month is almost cheating. ;-)

K) Wolf 

Significant benefits to perception and willpower. The willpower is good for wizards and 
mindcrafters, of course. Races that start with lower perception include dwarves, orcs and 
of course trolls.

L) Tree 

Made for mindcrafters, who really need that +5 to willpower in the early game. Not bad 
for wizards either.
