# 3.10 The Mana Temple

The Mana Temple is found on its own level, MT, the last level of the UL, the unreal cave 
system. The UL is a side branch off the main CoC at D: 46 or D: 47. The layout, on the 
right side of the level, is as follows:

```
 #################
 #........./.....#                        ############################
 #.........#####.###################      #^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^#
 #.........#   #.........../.......#      #^########################^#
 #.........#   #########.###.......#      #^#......................#^#
 #.........#         #...# #.......#      #^#......................#^#
 ###########     #####.### #.......#      #^#................###...#^#
                 #.....#   #.......#      #^#.................#....#^#
   ###############.#####   #.......#      #^1................._....#^#
   #...............#       #.......#      #^#.................#....#^#
   #.........#.#####       #########      #^#................###...#^#
   #.........#.#                          #^#......................#^#
   #.........#.#####################      #^#......................#^#
   #.........#./.....+.............#      #^########################^#
   #.........###.....#######....@..#      #^#^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^#
   #.........# #.....#     #.......#      ###1########################
   ########### #######     #########        #.#
                                            ###
```

The left side of the level is random. Note that the temple itself is disconnected. Entry 
must be made by digging. Teleportation does not work on this level. The walls of the Mana 
Temple itself are undiggable. It must be entered through the single square room at the 
southwest of the Temple. Note the traps completely surrounding the Temple. Ceiling traps 
replace teleportation traps in the Mana Temple. The numeral 1 is used to indicate secret 
doors. Note the underscore in the eastern center of the temple. This is the chaotic 
elemental altar where the orb guardian is found (at least until he is disturbed and moves). 
The standard warning about standing on altars applies - many of the monsters are capable of 
speech and will sacrifice the PC. The elemental altars can only be converted by champions 
of Balance or Order, which means PCs going for an ultra ending cannot convert them early in 
the game, before retrieving the Medal of Chaos. The monsters in the Mana Temple are arrayed 
as follows:

```
 #################
 #........./.....#                        ############################
 #.........#####.###################      #^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^#
 #.........#   #.........../.......#      #^########################^#
 #.........#   #########.###.......#      #^#ee.e.e.e.e.e........eC#^#
 #.........#         #...# #.......#      #^#e.C.C.C.C.C.C...CCC..C#^#
 ###########     #####.### #.......#      #^#e.C.C.C.C.C.C..C###C.C#^#
                 #.....#   #.......#      #^#e.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C#CC.C#^#
   ###############.#####   #.......#      #^1.................@CC.C#^#
   #...............#       #.......#      #^#e.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C#CC.C#^#
   #.........#.#####       #########      #^#e.C.C.C.C.C.C..C###C.C#^#
   #.........#.#                          #^#e.C.C.C.C.C.C...CCC..C#^#
   #.........#.#####################      #^#ee.e.e.e.e.e........eC#^#
   #.........#./.....+.............#      #^########################^#
   #.........###.....#######....@..#      #^#^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^#
   #.........# #.....#     #.......#      ###1########################
   ########### #######     #########        #.#
                                            ###
```

They are: 
* e - magebane eyes
* e - magedoom eyes
* C - chaos servants
* C - annihilators
* C - chaos wizards
* @ - Nuurag-Vaarn, the Chaos Archmage

To attack the temple, the PC must travel through the trap-filled tunnel around the temple. 
During this, the magebane eyes and magedoom eyes will be draining the power points of the 
PC. Classes which are dependent on power points are well advised to bring along blessed 
scrolls of power. If possible, a wand of trap detection should be saved for the Mana 
Temple. This is a much faster way of detecting the traps than using the Detect Traps skill, 
especially when combined with the Farsight spell or a necklace of the eye. The faster this 
tunnel is traversed, the less time the eyes have to drain the PP of the PC. The Mana Temple 
ranks with the nastiest places in the game. Many players do not enter the temple itself, 
instead staying in the corridor. Using this technique, the monsters can be fought one at a 
time. Even so, the chaos wizards are summoners, so the PC can still be surrounded by 
summoned monsters in the corridor. The objective using this method is to wait for 
Nuurag-Vaarn to exit the temple, kill him, collect the Orb and flee.


## 3.10.1 Nuurag-Vaarn, the Chaos Archmage
Nuurag-Vaarn is a difficult opponent, to say the least. He has a corrupting melee attack. 
He is very fond of casting spells, especially Death Ray and Darkness. Entering the Mana 
Temple without a means of death ray resistance is virtual suicide. He is also very good at 
confusing the PC and is a stat drainer. He is immune to elemental attacks other than acid. 
He is vulnerable to humanoid slaying ammo; this is a good way to attack him if the PC can 
maintain a clear shot at him through all the monsters, summoned and otherwise, in the 
temple.

Nuurag-Vaarn's vital statistics:

You examine Nuurag-Vaarn, the invisible Chaos Archmage. Diagnosis: Level: 1, 
DV: 60, PV: 30, Hits: 938, Attacks: 2, Damage: 9-36. Speed: 112.

To summarize the prerequisites needed to fight Nuurag-Vaarn:

1. Death Ray resistance - essential
2. confusion resistance - essential
3. light source - essential
4. humanoid slaying ammo - recommended

Nuurag-Vaarn holds the Chaos Orb of Elemental Mana, greater identified as follows:

------------------ 
uncursed Chaos Orb of Elemental Mana {Ma+10}
----------------

It is an artifact.

When used in melee combat it grants a +3 bonus to hit and causes 1d16+3 points 
of damage. When used as a missile it grants a +3 bonus to hit and causes 1d10+3 
points of damage.

It modifies your mana attribute by +10.

(full PP, +12 to PP, +3 Mana, corruption when 'U'sed)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

