# 3.13 D: 50

Level 50 of the Caverns of Chaos is the final battleground for those not attempting an 
ultra ending. It is appropriately challenging. The Mana Temple will have provided an idea 
of what CoC 50 will be like for PCs that make it this far. There will undoubtedly be many 
additions and revisions to this section.

The level layout on the left side of the level is as follows:

```
############                             #######
#&.........#                             #.....#
#..........############      #######     #.....#
#.....................#      #.....#     #.....#
#1###################.#      #.....#     #.....################# ###########
#...........##      #.#      #.....#     #...............+.....# #.........#
#............##     #1########.....#     #################.....###..@.<....#
#.............#   ###.......######.#                     #.....+.+.........#
#.............#####..........#####.#######################.....#############
#8......................................................./.....#
#.............#####..........#####.###########################/#     #######
#.............#   ###.......######.#       #.........#       #.#     #.....#
#............##     #1########.....#       #.........#       #.#     #.....#
#...........##      #.#      #.....#       #.........#       #.#     #.....#
#1###################.#      #.....#       #.........#########.#######.....#
#.....................#      #.....#       #........./.............../.....#
#&.........############      #######       #################################
############
```

The numeral 1 represents secret doors.

The right side of the level is random. Note the dungeon features. The & symbols in this map 
do not represent demons but rather levers. These control the state of the Chaos Gate, 
represented by the 8 in the large central room. These features cannot be seen in the color 
map on the web site.

Note that all of the & symbols in the color map *do* represent balors - there are balors 
standing on the levers.

There are two basic ways to finish CoC 50: The object of the level is to 'h'andle both of 
the levers, thus closing the Chaos Gate and ending the incursion of chaos into Ancardia. 
This can initially be accomplished by clearing the northern and southern corridors and 
'h'andling the levers. However, some of the monsters on CoC 50 are intelligent enough to 
reopen the gate. To ensure that the levers remain in their closed position, the PC has two 
choices: ensure the levers remain in their closed position forever, or make sure the 
following intelligent monsters are all dead: Fistanarius, balors, ghost lords and chaos 
wizards.

A third alternative is available for those PCs who aspire to a special ending, which 
require Chaos Gate entry. Much of the combat on D: 50 can be bypassed as soon as it is 
possible to teleport to the location of the Chaos Gate. In order to do this, Fistanarius, 
the greater balor, must move from his position on top of the Chaos Gate. See section 4 
Special Endings, for more about the (extensive) requirements for attempting a special 
ending.

## 3.13.1 Wands of destruction ending

One relatively easy way to finish CoC 50 is to use wands of destruction. This, and the 
variation using wands of door creation / monster creation below, require substantially less 
combat than a traditional ending. The level is diggable, so it is possible to tunnel into 
the northern and southern corridors and clear them. Remember they are closed by secret 
doors. During this, some of the intelligent monsters may sense what is happening - ghost 
lords may pass through the walls, balors may teleport in. When both corridors are cleared, 
'h'andle one of the levers to close it. Zap a wand of destruction to destroy it in its 
closed state. This will open the walls to the large central room and make all of those 
monsters pursue the PC. Teleport to the other lever, 'h'andle it to close it and zap a wand 
of destruction to destroy it. Teleport to the up staircase and leave. You've won. Here is 
an example of what the level might look like after doing this:

```
######    ######################################
#....######...*.***..]*.*.......&..............##                 #######
#%.[C.C....[###################################.##                #.....#
#.CC.......############      #######          ##.##################$....#
#C..G..C......C.CC....#      #CCCCC#           #.&.....#.........+.....#
#C...################.#      #CCCCC#           #.......#.###########.#.#
#......CCCCC##      #C#      #CCCCC#           #.......#.#         #.#.#
#.C.C........##     ##########CCCCC#   #########.......#.###########.#.###
#C..C.GGGGGG..#   ###jjjjjjj######.#   #.....+.+.......#...............[.#
#.C.C.GGGGGG..#####jjjjjjjjjj#####.#####.....#######/###.#############+#+###
#&&CCCGGGGGG..C...jjjjjjjjjjjjCCCCCCC../..&..#     #.# #&#           #....&#
#.....GGGGGG..#####jjjjjjjjjj#####.###########   ###/###/#########   #..&..#
#CCCG..GGGGG..#   ###jjjjjjj######.#             #.[....././.....#   #.....#
#C..CCCC.....##     ##########CCCCC#   ###########...../&###.....#   #.....#
#C...C..CCCC##      #C#      #CCCCC#   #...../.../.......# #.....#   #.....#
#...C.###############C#      #CCCCC#   #..<@.#####.......# #######   #######
#..[[.....C..C...CCCCC#      #CCCCC#  ##.....#   #....!..#
#..C[.....[############################.######   #########
#......####*.*].**.....................##
########  ##############################
```

Note most of the balors, but not Fistanarius, have teleported to search for the PC. The 
chaos mutants in the center, the greater chaos servants in the central corridor, the 
writhing masses of primal chaos and most of the ghost lords have not even moved.

Wands of door creation / monster creation ending

This is a variation on the above technique. It is somewhat safer in that the big room never 
has to be opened at all, but both wands of door creation with at least six total charges 
and a wand of monster creation with two charges are required. 

This method starts with the same approach as outlined above - clear the northern and 
southern corridors after entering them by digging. Zap a wand of door creation twice to 
almost enclose one of the levers. Handle the lever to close it. Zap a wand of monster 
creation to create a monster on the closed lever to prevent balors from teleporting to that 
space. Zap a wand of door creation to trap the monster on that square. Teleport to the 
other lever and repeat. Teleport to the stairs and leave.

This method has some problems, as does the wands of destruction ending above. Regardless, 
they are much, much easier than the alternative of killing the intelligent monsters on the 
level. First, some monsters will open doors, so it may be necessary to keep zapping, 
killing the monster and repeating until something suitable is generated. Locking the door 
will solve this problem if the PC has an appropriate key, which he should by this time. 
Second, you must be quick, which is why teleportation is recommended. It is quite likely 
that the balors will start teleporting to investigate the levers, and they are quite 
capable of opening the doors or smashing them if locked, killing the monster standing on 
the lever and reactivating the lever. Third is simply a philosophical problem. The PC has 
not really fulfilled the requirements for winning, but is taking advantage of the fact that 
the level will remain frozen after he leaves. Nonetheless, the game counts this as a win.

