# 3.6 The Cat Lord

The Cat Lord is found on D: 35 or D: 36. The level message "This level somehow seems to be 
removed from the rest of the world." is generated upon entering the level.  Note that 
teleportation is not allowed on the level and ceiling traps may therefore be generated. If 
the PC has killed no cats, the PC may 'C'hat with the Cat Lord, in which case the following 
message is generated: "The cat lord growls: "Thou hast respected the cat race. Thus I shall 
grant upon you this gift." The cat lord suddenly is gone. Nothing but a tiny ring is left 
of him." In this case, congratulations are due. The PC has the most powerful ring in the 
game, the artifact Ring of the Master Cat. It is enormously helpful in the end game, 
particularly because it grants +16 to Dexterity when the PC's dexterity is being destroyed 
by corruption. The ring's full properties are listed below:

-------------- 
ring of the master cat [+0,+5] {Dx+16} (+16 spd) 
------------------

When worn it modifies DV by +0 and PV by +5.
When used in melee combat it grants a +0 bonus to hit and causes 1d1 points of
damage. When used as a missile it grants a +0 bonus to hit and causes 1d1
points of damage.

It modifies your dexterity attribute by +16.
It is very good at scoring critical hits in melee. It modifies your speed by +16.
It makes Fate smile upon you.
It grants the ability to see invisible things.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If the PC has killed cats, the Cat Lord will be hostile. His power is dependent on the 
number of cats killed, becoming greater each time a cat is killed.

